2. Detailed descriptions
Legal and Ethical Aspects of Privacy
Form of module Lecture
Type of module Responsible Data Science
Level Master
ECTS 3
Hours per semester present: 28 h (2 SWS)
Self-study per semester: 60 h
Workload
• Pre-and post-lecture studying and preparation (30h)
• Examination preparation (30h)
Prerequisites None
In a first section the course will acquaint the students with the ori-
gins and basic principles of privacy law mainly in Europe. Further-
more, it will contrast the European privacy foundations with the
U.S. approach. At the core of this course stands the new European
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) and its applicability to
specific cases and basic principles. Moreover, the course will cover
current challenges to the existing privacy paradigms by big data
and big data analytics.
In a second section the course will cover ethical aspects of the use
Aim of module
of personal and non-personal data. Data potentially allows to iden-
tify and target individuals and offer individualized products to
them. However, sometimes this kind of individualization might be
legal but the question arises whether it is also desirable from an
ethical and societal point of view? The course will use selected ex-
amples (e.g. first-degree price discrimination) in order to illustrate
the ambivalence of legality, legitimacy, and ethics. In this context,
the use of artificial intelligence and its impact on privacy will be ad-
dressed.
Students will…
• have a basic knowledge on the applicability of the General Data
Protection Regulation (GDPR) and its basic principles (MK1,
MF1, MKO2);
• be aware of privacy issues and potential legal limitations when
Learning outcomes and
processing data (MKO2);
qualification goals
• be aware of current challenges to the existing privacy (MKO2);
• have an understanding why privacy issues are treated differ-
ently in Europe and the U.S. (MKO2);
• paradigms by big data and big data analytics;
• be aware of currently discussed new approaches to privacy
78(e.g., privacy by design) (MF1, MF2, MKO2);
• be aware of ethical issues of using personal as well as non-per-
sonal data (MKO2);
• be aware of the chances and challenges the use of artificial in-
telligence will bring (MF2, MKO2).
Media Video tutorials, lectures, online quizzes
Students will receive reading assignments for each unit together
Literature
with the syllabus at the beginning of the semester.
The class will generally be conducted as a lecture. However, some
of the sessions will be conducted on an inverted class-room princi-
Methods ple. Students will be able to access the video lectures at the begin-
ning of the semester. The content of these videos will be discussed
along with additional reading in the individual class sessions.
Form of assessment written examination
Admission requirements for
Successful participation in 5 out of at least 7 online quizzes
assessment
Duration of assessment 90 minutes
Language English
Offering HWS
Prof. Dr. Thomas Fetzer
Lecturer
Person in charge Prof. Dr. Thomas Fetzer
Duration of module 1 semester
Further modules -
Range of application MMDS, MMSDS
Semester 1st/2nd/3rd semester
79CS 718 AI and Data Science in Fiction and Society
Form of Module Seminar
Type of Module Seminar
Level Master
ECTS 4
Workload 120 h per semester
Prerequisites Bachelor degree
In this seminar, students analyze and discuss fictional works in the
Aim of module area of AI and data science with respect to technological and socie-
tal aspects. The present the results orally and in a written report.
Expertise:
Students will learn about societal effects of AI and data science
and become aware of potential threats and dangers, but also of
chances of those new technologies.
(MK1)
Methodological competence:
Students will develop methods and skills to find relevant literature
for his/her topic, and to write a well-structured scientific paper
Learning Outcomes and and to present his/her results. He/she will be also aware of the
Qualification Goals need to avoid plagiarism. The key qualification Scientific Research
is highly recommended as a prerequisite for the seminar.
(MF1, MF2, MF3)
Personal qualification:
Students will acquire skills on how to find relevant literature for a
research topic, discuss a fictional work using secondary literature
as background material, write a well-structured, concise paper
about it and present the results of their work. He/she is well pre-
pared to write and present a Master’s Thesis.
(MKO2)
Media Fictional and non-fictional texts
Literature A detailed literature list is compiled for each offering.
Teaching and Learning Me- Do scientific work independently under the guidance of a profes-
thods sor or a research staff member
Seminar paper (length: 15-20 pages depending on the topic), Peer
Form of Assessment Review (up to 10 pages), Presentation (20-30) minutes depending
on the topic)
80Admission requirements for
-
assessment
Duration of Assessment 6-8 weeks (writing of the essay), 20-30 minutes (presentation).
Language English
Offering Fall semester
Lecturers Prof. Dr. Heiko Paulheim and research staff members
Person in charge Prof. Dr. Heiko Paulheim
Duration of module 1 semester
Further modules -
Range of Application MMDS, M. Sc. Wirtschaftsinformatik, Lehramt für Gymnasien
Semester 3. Semester
81AC 654 Additional Course – Responsible Data Science
Typically: lecture, other forms of modules might be credited upon
Form of module
request.
Level Master
Max. 18 (The individual modules can vary between 2 and 10 ECTS.
ECTS
A total of 18 ECTS can be recognized as additional courses).
The workload and its distribution on different activities are deter-
mined by the credited course. For courses taken at the University
Workload
of Mannheim, they can be found in the respective module cata-
logue. One ECTS credit equals 30 hours of work.
The prerequisites are determined by the credited course. For
Prerequisites courses taken at the University of Mannheim, they can be found
in the respective module catalogue
The course falls into the responsible data science area of the
MMDS and covers topics related to responsible data science, but
is not directly equivalent to any course in the MMDS module cat-
Aim of module
alogue. The course level equals a regular course in MMDS study
program. The module can be taken either at the University of
Mannheim or at any other university in Germany or abroad.
The learning outcomes and qualification goals are determined by
Learning outcomes and quali-
the credited course. For courses taken at the University of Mann-
fication goals
heim, they can be found in the respective module catalogue.
The media, literature, and methods are determined by the cred-
ited course. For courses taken at the University of Mannheim,
Media / Literature / Methods
they can be found in the respective module catalogue. The form
/ Form and duration of as-
of assessment is typically a written or oral examination, but can
sessment
also include other forms of examination. Details are determined
by the examination modalities of the credited course.
English preferred, but any other language possible if Mannheim
Language
faculty member is able to identify content and level
Offering Spring semester / Fall semester
Lecturer Lecturer at the host university
82Person in charge Lecturer at the host university
Duration of module 1 Semester
Further modules -
Range of application MMDS
Semester 2nd/3rd/4th semester
83Responsible AI: Conceptual Foundations, Methods and Applica-
DS 203
tions
Lecture with Essay
Form of module
Specialization Course
Type of module
Level Master
ECTS 6
Hours per semester in presence: 28 (2 SWS)
Workload
Self-study: 56 h lectures; 20 h essay / preparation oral exam
Basic knowledge about AI systems (knowledge-based systems,
Prerequisites
machine learning, deep neural networks)
Conceptual foundations:
- understanding of important concepts in human-AI interaction and
AI ethics (such as trust, autonomy, responsibility)
Methods:
- e.g., narrative interviews, group discussions, design research
methods (prototyping, design thinking, techno-mimesis), (digital)
Aim of module
ethnography, participatory action research
Applications:
- AI in medicine and healthcare
- Social robotics
- Generative AI
- other use cases / real-world AI applications
Expertise: Students gain insights and understanding of important
concepts in human-AI interaction and AI ethics. They learn modes
of transdisciplinary thinking and theorizing. Along sector-specific
use cases they learn about ethical, legal and social aspects and chal-
lenges of real-world AI application, e.g. for healthcare.
Learning outcomes and
Methodological competence: Students learn elements of mixed-
qualification goals
methods study design for human-AI interaction research
Personal competence: Students learn to critically assess concep-
tual, ethical, legal and social aspects of human-AI interaction. They
gain skills in transdisciplinary research and theory-building and
learn to transfer these insights to real-world human-AI interaction
scenarios.
Media Slides are available online
- Voeneky, S., P. Kellmeyer, O. Mueller, and W. Burgard, ed. 2022.
Literature
The Cambridge Handbook of Responsible Artificial Intelligence:
84Interdisciplinary Perspectives. Cambridge Law Handbooks. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009207898 (open source)
- Coeckelbergh, Mark. AI ethics. (2020). The MIT Press.
https://www.gbv.de/dms/bowker/toc/9780262538190.pdf
- Heilinger, J.-C. (2022). The Ethics of AI Ethics. A Constructive Cri-
tique. Philosophy & Technology, 35(3), 61.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13347-022-00557-9
- McLennan, S., Fiske, A., Tigard, D., Müller, R., Haddadin, S., &
Buyx, A. (2022). Embedded ethics: A proposal for integrating ethics
into the development of medical AI. BMC Medical Ethics, 23(1), 6.
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12910-022-00746-3
- Schmitt, L. (2021). Mapping global AI governance: A nascent re-
gime in a fragmented landscape. AI and Ethics.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s43681-021-00083-y
Interactive lecture
Methods
Essay
Form of assessment
Admission requirements for
--
assessment
Duration of assessment Essays need to be handed in by December 8th
Language English
Offering
Fall semester
JProf. Dr. Philipp Kellmeyer
Lecturer
Person in charge JProf. Dr. Philipp Kellmeyer
Duration of module 1 Semester
Further modules Follow-up (block) seminar planned for summer semester 2024
Range of application Msc Business Informatics, Msc Data Science, Lehramt Informatik
Semester All semesters possible
85