2. Detailed descriptions
AC 651 Additional Course – Data Management
Typically: lecture, other forms of modules might be credited
Form of module
upon request.
Level Master
Max. 18 (The individual modules can vary between 2 and 10
ECTS ECTS. A total of 18 ECTS can be recognized as additional
courses).
The workload and its distribution on different activities are deter-
mined by the credited course. For courses taken at the University
Workload
of Mannheim, they can be found in the respective module cata-
logue. One ECTS credit equals 30 hours of work.
The prerequisites are determined by the credited course. For
Prerequisites courses taken at the University of Mannheim, they can be found in
the respective module catalogue
The course falls into the data management area of the MMDS
and covers topics related to data management but is not di-
rectly equivalent to any course in the MMDS module cata-
Aim of module
logue. The course level equals a regular course in MMDS study
program. The module can be taken either at the University of
Mannheim or at any other university in Germany or abroad.
The learning outcomes and qualification goals are deter-
Learning outcomes and mined by the credited course. For courses taken at the Uni-
qualification goals versity of Mannheim, they can be found in the respective
module catalogue.
The media, literature, and methods are determined by the credited
course. For courses taken at the University of Mannheim, they can
Media / Literature / Meth-
be found in the respective module catalogue. The form of assess-
ods / Form and duration
ment is typically a written or oral examination, but can also include
of assessment
other forms of examination. Details are determined by the exami-
nation modalities of the credited course.
English preferred, but any other language possible if Mann-
Language
heim faculty member is able to identify content and level
Offering Spring semester / Fall semester
Lecturer Lecturer at the host university
Person in charge Lecturer at the host university
Duration of module 1 Semester
15Further modules -
Range of application MMDS
Semester 2nd/3rd/4th semester
16DS 200 Sampling and Data
Form of module Lecture and Tutorial
Type of module Data Science Methods: Fundamentals
Level Master
ECTS 9 (270 hours)
Hours per semester present: 56 h (4 SWS)
Self-study: 214 h per semester
Workload • 91 h: pre and post lecture studying and revision
• 42 h: studying for and taking weekly online tests
• 41 h: preparation and presentation of weekly exercises
• 40 h: examination preparation
Prerequisites -
The course introduces the most important social scientific
Aim of module forms of research and data collection methods, with a special
focus on sampling methods.
Expertise:
Students can independently formulate research questions
and empirically verifiable hypotheses.
(MK1)
Methodological competence:
Students know different data collection methods and their
advantages and disadvantages; they are able to assess the
Learning outcomes and appropriateness of the methods used to answer various
qualification goals questions; they understand and critically evaluate the design
of empirical studies.
(MK1)
Personal competence:
The course supports students to develop competences with
regard to choosing the appropriate research design and sam-
pling frame.
(MF2, MKO1, MKO2)
Media Lecture slides available online
• Salganik, M. 2017. Bit by Bit: Social Research in the Digital
Literature
Age. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
17• Foster et al. 2020. Big Data and Social Science: A Practical
Guide to Methods and Tools. 2nd Edition. Boca Raton, FL:
CRC Press.
Methods Lecture elements, weekly online tests, literature studies
Form of assessment Written examination
Admission requirements for Oral participation, homework, presentations, compulsory at-
assessment tendance
Duration of assessment 90 Minutes
Language English
Offering Fall semester
Lecturer of the School of Social Sciences, I.e. Chair of Social
Lecturer
Data Science
Lecturer of the School of Social Sciences, I.e. chair of Social
Person in charge
Data Science
Duration of module 1 semester
Further modules
Range of application MMSDS
Semester 1st semester
18Advanced Software Engineering (Software Testing and Ex-
CS 500
perimentation)
Form of module Lectures, exercises and tutorials
Type of module Computer Science Fundamental
Level Master
ECTS 6
Hours per semester present: 56 h (2 + 2 SWS)
Self-study: 112 h per semester
Workload
• 28 h per semester for preparation and studying of lec-
tures/tutorials
• 84 h per semester for the preparation of the exams
Prerequisites Knowledge of Java and/or Python
The course introduces the fundamental concepts and prac-
tices of software testing, and software experimentation / eval-
uation
• Principles of Testing
Aim of module • Test Coverage Criteria
• Test specification techniques
• Model-based testing
• Principles of Experimentation
• Using Software Observatoriums
Expertise:
Students will be familiar with principles, approaches and tools
for testing software and the methods and empirically evaluat-
ing software products, methods and tools
(MK1, MK2)
Methodological competence:
Students will have the ability to judge, select, and apply tradi-
Learning outcomes and tional or non-traditional test tools and techniques to evaluate
qualification goals software quality, as well as to design and perform software
experiments.
(MF1) (MF1, MF3)
Personal competence:
Students will have improved skills in analytical thinking and ap-
plying theoretical knowledge to solve practical problems, es-
pecially in software testing and experimentation.
(MKO3)
19Lecture notes, presentations, tool demonstrations, software,
Media
data sets
• Paul Ammann & Jeff Offutt., “Introduction to Software
Literature
Testing”, Cambridge University Press, January 2008.
Lectures, weekly exercises, experimentation with different
Methods
systems
Form of assessment Written examination
Admission requirements
-
for assessment
Duration of assessment 90 minutes
Language English
Offering Fall semester
Lecturer Dr. Marcus Kessel, Prof. Dr. Colin Atkinson
Person in charge Prof. Dr. Colin Atkinson
Duration of module 1 Semester
Further modules Model-Driven
M.Sc. Wirtschaftsinformatik, M.Sc. Mannheim Master in Data
Range of application
Science, Lehramt Informatik
Semester 1st or 2nd semester
20CS 550 Algorithmics
Form of module Lecture with tutorials
Type of module Fundamental in Computer Science
Level Master
ECTS 6
Attendance: 56 h per semester (4 h per week)
Self-study: 112 h per semester
Workload
• 28 h per semester for preparation and reworking of lec-
tures/tutorials
• 84 h per semester for the preparation of the exams
Practical Informatics I, Algorithms and Data Structures, Linear Al-
Prerequisites
gebra, Statistics
The lecture deals with the design and the analysis of algorithms
for various practically relevant computational problems and with
methods for analyzing the complexity of certain problems. In par-
ticular, we will learn methods of formalizing discrete optimization
problems and designing algorithms for them on the basis of ana-
lyzing the structure of these problems.
Moreover, we will learn techniques for proving the correctness
and estimating the running time of these algorithms. In the sec-
ond part of the lecture, we will deal with the theory of NP-com-
Aim of module pleteness with gives evidence that certain highly relevant prob-
lems do not have efficient algorithms. During the lecture we will
derive algorithms and complexity-theoretic results for the follow-
ing computational problems:
• shortest path problems and shortest round tour problems
• linear optimization problems
• flow problem
• matching problems
• satisfiability problems
• discret linear optimization problems
21Professional expertise:
The students know efficient algorithms and the most important
complexity-theoretic results for a number of computational prob-
lems which are highly relevant in practice.
(MK1, MK2)
Methodological competence: The students learn to formalize in-
formally specified computational problems, to analyse their struc-
ture with the goal to design efficient algorithms, to prove the cor-
rectness and to analyse the running time of given algorithms.
Learning outcomes and Moreover, they learn to prove the NP-completeness of certain
qualification goals problems.
(MF1, MF3)
Personal competence: Training of analytical, focussed and precise
thinking. Further development of abstraction abilities and the
ability to transfer theoretical knowledge for solving practical
problems, especially in the field of operations research. Increas-
ing the sensitivity for the complexity and the efficient solvability
of computational problems, especially through dealing with the
theory of NP-completeness.
(MF1, MKO3)
Media Writing with chalk at the blackboard, slides and electronic media
• Cormen, Leiserson, Rivest, Stein: Introduction to Algorithms,
3rd edition
• Shimon Even: Graph Algorithms
• Lovasz, Plummer: Matching Theory
Literature
• Handbooks on Operations Research and Management Science
Volume 7 (Editors: Ball, Magnati, Monma, Nemhauser)
• J. Toran: Das Erfüllbarkeitsproblem SAT, Lehmann Media,
2012
Reworking of lectures and tutorials, self-studies with literature,
Methods solving exercises at home and in cooperation with other students
at the tutorials
Form of assessment Written examination
Admission requirements
-
for assessment
Duration of assessment 90 Minutes
Language English
22Offering Fall semester / Spring semester
Lecturer Prof. Dr. Matthias Krause
Person in charge Prof. Dr. Matthias Krause
Duration of module 1 semester
Further modules CS 651 – Cryptography II
M.Sc. Wirtschaftsinformatik, M.Sc. Wirtschaftsmathematik, M.Sc.
Range of application Wirtschaftspädagogik, Lehramt Informatik, M.Sc. Mathematik,
MMDS, MMSDS
Semester 1./ 2. Semester
23CS 600 Model Driven Development
Form of module Lectures with accompanying tutorials
Type of module Specialization course
Level Master
ECTS 6
Hours per semester present at university: 56 h (4 SWS)
Self-study: 112 h semester
Workload
• 28 h: pre and post lecture studying and revision
• 56 h: tutorial exercises
• 28 h: directed independent study (reading papers, books etc.)
Prerequisites • Software Testing and Experimentation
The course focuses on the principles, practices and tools involved
in advanced model-driven development. This includes estab-
lished modelling standard languages (e. g. UML, ATL, OCL) and
modelling infrastructures (e. g. MOF, EMF, …) as well as leading
edge, state-of-the-art modelling technologies (e. g. LML, PLM . . .
). Key topics addressed include:
• Principles of Model-Driven Development
Aim of module
• Meta-Modeling
• Domain-Specific Languages
• Model Constraint and Transformation languages
• Multi-View/Multi-Paradigm Modeling
• Multi-Level Modeling
• Ontology Modeling
• Enterprise Architecture Modeling
Expertise:
Students will be familiar with the accepted best practices and
technologies used in mainstream model-driven development as
well as state-of-the-art modeling technologies emerging from re-
search institutions.
(MK1, MK2)
Methodological competence:
Learning outcomes and Students will know how to apply modeling technologies in real-
qualification goals world projects.
(MF1, MF3)
24Personal competence:
Students will have the capability to analyse, understand and
model complex systems.
(MKO1)
Media Printed Lecture Notes, Presentations, Tool Demonstrations
• Jos B. Warmer and Anneke G. Kleppe, The Object Constraint
Literature Language: Getting Your Models Ready for MDA, Addison-
Wesley Object Technology Series, 2003
Methods Lectures, tutorials, independent study
Form of assessment Written examination
Admission requirements
-
for assessment
Duration of assessment 90 minutes
Language English
Offering Fall semester
Lecturer Prof. Dr. Colin Atkinson
Person in charge Prof. Dr. Colin Atkinson
Duration of module 1 semester
Further modules -
M.Sc. Wirtschaftsinformatik, M.Sc. Mannheim Master in Data Sci-
Range of application
ence, Lehramt Informatik
Semester 2nd, 3rd or 4th semester
25CS 651 Cryptography II
Form of module Inverted classroom
Type of module Specialization course
Level Master
ECTS 6
Hours per semester present: 56h (4 SWS)
Self-study: 112h
Even though the lecture deepens and continues topics dis-
Workload
cussed in “CS 404 Cryptography I”, it is not a prerequisite to
Prerequisites
have attended this lecture. The lecture “Cryptography II” can
be studied without any prior knowledge on cryptography – all
necessary basics are shortly recapitulated.
The goal of this lecture is to present and discuss important
scientific concepts from modern cryptography. This includes:
• Security Definitions: How can the security of crypto-
graphic schemes formally defined?
• Proofs of Security: How can the security of cryptographic
Aim of module
schemes be proven (based on precise assumptions)?
• Cryptanalysis: What are the established techniques to an-
alyze cryptographic mechanisms?
• Elliptic Curves
• Zero-Knowledge Proofs
Expertise:
With the help of current techniques and theories of modern
cryptography, the students can assess the security of crypto-
graphic processes and assess security statements accord-
ingly. Furthermore, they can identify security goals and use
appropriate techniques that could not be dealt with in “CS
404 Cryptography I”.
(MK2)
Methodological competence:
Learning outcomes and The students can select and use suitable methods for the se-
qualification goals curity analysis of cryptographic processes. This includes, for
example, the choice of the appropriate security model, proof
of security based on clearly specified assumptions and the
analysis of given procedures. In particular, the students can
understand and assess the security arguments for existing
procedures and to transfer them to new ones. Furthermore,
they can use techniques and protocols to achieve security
goals that were not yet possible with the methods discussed
in “CS 404 Cryptography I”.
(MK1)
26Personal competence:
The analytic, concentrated, and precise thinking of the students is
trained. By the independent treatment of applications, e.g. in the
course of the exercises, their abstraction capacity is further devel-
oped and the transfer of the learned material to related questions
is trained.
(MF1, MKO3)
Media Video recordings, annotated lecture slides
Jonathan Katz, Yehuda Lindell: Introduction to Modern Cryp-
Literature tography: Principles and Protocols, Chapman and Hall/CRC,
2007.
Reworking the lecture and studying the relevant literature in
self-study. During the lecture: discussing questions and ideas
Methods and working together on concrete examples. Solving exer-
cises in self-study and in practice in cooperation with fellow
students.
Form of assessment Oral exam
Admission requirements
none
for assessment
Duration of assessment 30 minutes
Language English
Offering HWS
Lecturer Prof. Dr. Frederik Armknecht
Person in charge Prof. Dr. Frederik Armknecht
Duration of module One term
Further modules none
M.Sc. Mannheim Master in Data Science,
Range of application M.Sc. Wirtschaftsinformatik, Lehramt Informatik,
M.Sc. Mathematik
Semester 1st/2nd/3rd semester
27CS 655 Cryptography
Form of Module Lecture with Exercise
Type of Module Specialization Course
Level Master
ECTS 6
Hours per semester present: 56 (4 SWS)
Workload
Self-study: 98h (70h lectures/exercises, 28h exam prepara-
tion
Basis skills in linear algebra, probability theory, algorithms,
Prerequisites
and data structures
• Basic concepts of cryptography
• Mathematical Background
• Basics of Information Theory
• Block Ciphers (DES, AES, etc.)
• Stream Ciphers
Aim of Module
• Secure Key Exchange Protocols (Diffie-Hellman protocol,
etc.)
• Public Key encryption (RSA)
• Cryptographic Hash Functions
• Signature Systems and Message Authentication Codes
Expertise:
After the course the students are able to identify security
risks in various modern scenarios of data traffic like online
banking, wireless communication, online trade ...
(MK1)
Methodological competence:
The students are able to formulate and formalize
Learning Outcomes and security goals for various use cases and to choose and to ap-
qualification goals ply appropriate methods to reach
these goals. Examples
here are to provide data security data encryption, to estab-
lish trusted electronical
data encryption, to establish trusted electronical
communication channels, or to apply methods for secure au-
thentication
(MF1)
28Personal competence:
The course trains abstract thinking and the ability to
formally model application scenarios. By solving exercises
independently, the transfer of the learned material to
related questions is promoted.
Media Exercise sheets and lecture slides available online, blackboard
• Christof Paar, Bart Preneel, Jan Pelzl: Understanding Cryp-
tography: A Terxtbook for Students and Practi-
tioners, Springer 2009
Literature • Douglas R. Stinson: Cryptography - Theory and Practice,
Taylor & Francis, 2005
• Alan G. Konheim: Cryptography: A Primer, John Wiley &
Sons, 1981
Methods Lecture, exercises every two weeks, book studies
Form of assessment Oral examination
Admission requirements
-
for assessment
Duration of assessment 15 – 30 minutes
Language English
Offering FSS
Person in Charge Prof. Dr. Matthias Krause
Duration of Module 1 Semester
Further Modules Cryptography II
M.Sc Business Informatics, M.Sc Data Science, Lehramt In-
Range of Application
formatik, B.Sc. Wirtschaftsmathematik
Semester 1st/2nd/3rd Semester
29