2. Detailed descriptions
AC 652 Additional Course – Data Analytics Methods
Typically: lecture, other forms of modules might be credited
Form of module
upon request.
Level Master
Max. 18 (The individual modules can vary between 2 and 10
ECTS ECTS. A total of 18 ECTS can be recognized as additional
courses).
The workload and its distribution on different activities are
determined by the credited course. For courses taken at the
Workload
University of Mannheim, they can be found in the respective
module catalogue. One ECTS credit equals 30 hours of work.
The prerequisites are determined by the credited course. For
Prerequisites courses taken at the University of Mannheim, they can be
found in the respective module catalogue
The course falls into the data analytics methods area of the
MMDS and covers topics related to data analytics methods,
but is not directly equivalent to any course in the MMDS
Aim of module module catalogue. The course level equals a regular course in
MMDS study program. The module can be taken either at the
University of Mannheim or at any other university in Ger-
many or abroad.
The learning outcomes and qualification goals are deter-
Learning outcomes and mined by the credited course. For courses taken at the Uni-
qualification goals versity of Mannheim, they can be found in the respective
module catalogue.
The media, literature, and methods are determined by the
credited course. For courses taken at the University of Mann-
Media / Literature / Meth- heim, they can be found in the respective module catalogue.
ods / Form and duration The form of assessment is typically a written or oral examina-
of assessment tion, but can also include other forms of examination. Details
are determined by the examination modalities of the cred-
ited course.
46English preferred, but any other language possible if Mann-
Language
heim faculty member is able to identify content and level
Offering Spring semester / Fall semester
Lecturer Lecturer at the host university
Person in charge Lecturer at the host university
Duration of module 1 Semester
Further modules -
Range of application MMDS
Semester 2nd/3rd/4th semester
47DS 100 Statistics for Data Scientists
Form of module Lecture and Tutorial
Type of module Foundations of Data Science
Level Master
ECTS 9 (270 hours)
Hours per semester present: 56 h (4 SWS)
Self-study: 214 h per semester
Workload • 91 h: pre and post lecture/tutorial studying and revision
• 42 h: studying for and taking weekly online tests
• 40 h: examination preparation
• 41 h: preparation and presentation of weekly exercises
A sound understanding of the linear regression model (OLS) is
Prerequisites
required. Knowledge in linear algebra and calculus is useful.
The course provides an introduction to causal inference, linear
models, and maximum likelihood estimation. The course will
cover the following topics:
• Causal Inference
• Hypotheses testing
Aim of module
• Linear Regression
· Selected GLM, e.g., binary choice models, models for
ordinal data, models multinomial data, models for count
data
Expertise (MK1, MK3):
Understand how to appropriately translate research question
into statistical models, be able to apply statistical models appro-
priate for non-linear problems and learn how to present and in-
terpret estimation results in a substantive meaningful way.
Methodological competence (MK1, MK3):
Learning outcomes and
Estimate regression parameters using the maximum likelihood
qualification goals
principle; Perform hypothesis tests for regression models using
the maximum likelihood principle; Be able to identify violations
of the respective regression assumptions of the discussed
GLMs; Be able to identify limitations of non-linear regression
models.
Personal competence (MF1, MF2, MF3, MKO1, MKO2):
48The course supports students to develop competences with re-
gard to choosing the appropriate statistical method(s) to an-
swer respective research questions and how to present and
communicate statistical results.
Media Lecture slides available online, exercises available online
• Cameron, C.A. and P.K. Trivedi. 1998. Regression Analysis
of Count Data. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
• Greene, W.H. (2008). Econometric Analysis. 6th ed. Upper
Saddle River: Prentice Hall.
• Long, J.S. (1997). Regression Models for Categorical and
Limited Dependent Variables. Thousand Oaks: Sage.
• Verbeek, M. 2017. A Guide to Modern Econometrics. 5th
ed. Chichester: Wiley.
Literature
• Wooldridge, J.M. 2002. Econometric Analysis of Cross Sec-
tion and Panel Data. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
• Imbens, Guido W., and Donald B. Rubin. Causal Inference for
Statistics, Social, and Biomedical Sciences: An Introduction.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2015.
• Angrist, Joshua D., and Jorn-Steffen Pischke. Mostly Harm-
less Econometrics: An Empiricist's Companion. Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 2009.
Methods Lecture elements, weekly online tests, literature studies
Form of assessment Written examination
Admission requirements Oral participation, homework, presentations, compulsory at-
for assessment tendance
Duration of assessment 90 Minutes
Language English
Offering Fall semester
Lecturer of the School of Social Sciences, I.e chair of Social Data
Lecturer
Science
Lecturer of the School of Social Sciences, I.e. Chair of social Data
Person in charge
Science
Duration of module 1 semester
Further modules
49Range of application MMDS
Semester 1st semester
50DS 202 Seminar and Lab on Machine Learning and Causal Inference
Form of module Seminar
Type of module Data Science Methods: Fundamentals
Level Master
ECTS 9 (270 hours)
Hours per semester present: 56 h (4 SWS)
Self-study: h per semester
Workload
• 70 h: pre and post seminar studying and revision
• 70 h: analyzing data, programming Python scripts
• 74 h: preparation and presentation of research project
Students should be familiar with Python or at least with any
Prerequisites
other object-programming language.
The module introduces, discusses, and offers hands-on expe-
rience in state-of-the-art topics in data science. It consists of
a “theoretical” part (seminar) which offers room for discus-
Aim of module sion on hot topics of data science and an “empirical” part
where students formalize research questions and analyze
data (of their own) using advanced techniques of machine
learning.
Expertise:
Students are able to find appropriate techniques of machine
learning to answer complex research questions; they can an-
alyze (large) data sets using state-of-the-art techniques of
machine learning.
(MK1)
Methodological competence:
Students are able to program in Python; they can apply ad-
Learning outcomes and
vanced techniques of machine learning to individual research
qualification goals
questions; they have in-depth knowledge in application of
data science.
(MK1, MK2, MK3)
Personal competence:
Students are able to independently implement their research
question in a research project; they can deal with and solve
theoretical and empirical problems.
(MF1, MF2, MF3, MF4, MKO1, MKO2)
51Media Slides available online
• Downey, Allen B. 2016. Think Python. How to Think Like a
Computer Scientist. 2nd ed. Needham: Green Tea Press.
(available online: http://greenteapress.com/thinkpy-
thon2/thinkpython2.pdf)
Literature • Guttag, John V. 2021. Introduction to Computation and
Programming Using Python. 3rd. ed. Cambridge: MIT
Press.
• The Python Tutorial (online: https://docs.py-
thon.org/3/tutorial/)
Lecture elements, classroom discussion, weekly lab-sessions,
Methods
literature studies
Form of assessment Written examination
Admission requirements for Oral participation, homework, presentations, compulsory at-
assessment tendance
Duration of assessment 90 Minutes
Language English
Offering Fall semester
Lecturer of the School of Social Sciences, I.e. chair of social
Lecturer
data science
Lecturer of the School of Social Sciences, I.e. chair of social
Person in charge
data science
Duration of module 1 semester
Further modules
Range of application MMSDS
Semester 3rd semester
52IE 560 Decision Support
Form of module Inverted classroom
Type of module Business Informatics Fundamental
Level Master
ECTS 6
Hours per semester: 42 h (1+2 SWS)
Workload Self-study per semester: 138 h
• 89 h: pre- and post lecture studying and revision
• 49 h: exam preparation
Basic Probability Theory, Basic Knowledge of Propositional and
Prerequisites
First-Order Logic
The course provides an introduction to decision support tech-
niques as a basis for the design of decision support systems. The
course will cover the following topics:
• Decision Theory
Aim of module
• Decision- and Business Rules
• Probabilistic Graphical Models
• Game Theory and Mechanism Design
• Decision Processes and Reinforcement Learning
Expertise:
Students will acquire basic knowledge of the techniques, opportu-
nities and applications of decision theory.
(MK1, MF1)
Learning outcomes and Methodological competence:
qualification goals Successful participants will be able to identify opportunities for de-
cision support in an enterprise environment, select and apply ap-
propriate techniques, and interpret the results.
(MK2, MF3, MF4, MKO1)
Personal competence: -
Media Lecture videos, slide set, exercise sheets, software tools
• S. Russel and P. Norvig: AI a modern Approach (3rd Edition),
Literature
2010 (selected sections)
The course consists of a lecture accompanied by practical home-
Methods
work and case studies. In the lecture, the students basic concepts
53and methods of decision theory will be explained both in theory
and using concrete examples. The students will practice and test
their knowledge acquired in the lecture in homework assignments.
Within the case studies, students model real world decision prob-
lems and try to solve them optimally using methods from the lec-
ture.
Form of assessment Written exam
Admission requirements for
-
assessment
Duration of assessment Written examination: 90 minutes
Language English
Offering Fall semester
Lecturer Prof. Dr. Heiner Stuckenschmidt
Person in charge Prof. Dr. Heiner Stuckenschmidt
Duration of module 1 Semester
Further modules -
M.Sc. Wirtschaftsinformatik, M.Sc. Mannheim Master in Data Sci-
Range of application
ence,
Semester 1st/2nd semester
54IE 671 Web Mining
Form of module Lecture and Exercise
Type of module Specialization course
Level Master
ECTS 3
Hours per semester: 28 h (2 SWS)
Workload Self-study: 56 h per semester
• 31 h: pre and post lecture studying and revision
• 25 h: examination and presentation preparation
IE 500 Data Mining I (recommended). Fundamental notions of lin-
Prerequisites
ear algebra and probability theory.
The vast amounts of textual content and structured data found on
the Web provide us with a goldmine of data that can be mined to
derive knowledge about nearly every aspect of human life. The
course covers techniques for extracting knowledge from Web con-
tent as a basis for business decisions and applications. The course
will cover the following topics: Web Usage Mining (including Rec-
Aim of module ommender Systems), Web Structure Mining (including Social Net-
work Analysis), and Web Content Mining (including Sentiment
Analysis and Hate Speech Detection).
NOTE: It is highly recommended to attend the module “Web Min-
ing Project” in the same semester since the schedule and topics of
both modules are aligned.
Expertise:
Students will acquire knowledge of the techniques, opportunities
and applications of Web mining.
(MK1, MF1)
Methodological competence:
Learning outcomes and
Successful participants will be able to identify opportunities for
qualification goals
mining knowledge from Web content, select and apply appropriate
techniques and interpret the results.
(MK2, MF3, MF4)
Personal competence: -
Media slide set, exercise sheets, data sets for the exercises
• Bing Liu: Web Data Mining. 2nd Edition, Springer, 2011.
Literature • Wouter de Nooy, et al.: Exploratory Social Network Analysis
with Pajek. 2nd Edition, Cambridge University Press, 2011.
55• Bing Liu. Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining, Morgan &
Claypool Publishers, 2012.
The course consists of a lecture together with accompanying prac-
tical exercises as well as student team projects. In the exercises the
Methods
participants will gather initial expertise in applying state of the art
web mining tools.
Form of assessment Written examination
Admission requirements for
-
assessment
Duration of assessment 60 minutes
Language English
Offering Spring semester
Lecturer Prof. Dr. Christian Bizer
Person in charge Prof. Dr. Christian Bizer
Duration of module 1 semester
Further modules -
M.Sc. Wirtschaftsinformatik, M.Sc. Mannheim Master in Data Sci-
Range of application
ence, Lehramt Informatik, MMSDS
Semester 1st/2nd/3rd semester
56IE 678 Deep Learning
Form of module Lecture with exercises
Type of module Specialization Course
Level Master
ECTS 6
Hours per semester: 56h (4 SWS)
Workload
Exercises, assignments, and self-study: 98 h
IE 675b Machine Learning or equivalent, no attempted or com-
Prerequisites
pleted IE 674 exam
Machine learning is concerned with building computer systems
that improve with experience as well as the study of learning pro-
cesses, including the design of algorithms that are able to make
predictions or extract knowledge from data. Building upon IE
675b Machine Learning, this course focuses on deep learning and
introduces basic and advanced deep learning architectures and
techniques, training methods and hyperparameter optimization,
as well as selected applications. Topics include:
Aim of module • Feedforward neural networks
• Backpropagation and parameter optimization
• Machine learning systems
• Training techniques for deep learning models
• Recurrent neural networks
• Convolutional neural networks
• Attention and Transformers
• Deep learning for graphs
• Deep generative modelling
Expertise:
Deep understanding of fundamental concepts, models, and algo-
rithms of deep learning
(MK1, MF1)
Learning outcomes and Methodological competence:
qualification goals • Being able to build and train deep learning models
• Being able to select suitable deep learning techniques for a
given learning problem
(MK2, MF3, MF4)
Personal competence:
57• writing skills
• presentation skills
• statistical programming skills
(MKO3, MF2)
Media Slide set, exercise sheets, software, datasets
• I. Drori. The Science of Deep Learning. Cambridge University
Press, 2023
• I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, A. Courville. Deep Learning, The MIT
Press, 2017
Literature • K.P. Murphy. Probabilistic Machine Learning: An Introduction.
The MIT Press, 2022
• K.P. Murphy. Probabilistic Machine Learning: Advanced
Topics. The MIT Press, 2023
• Additional material and articles provided in lecture notes
The course consists of a lecture accompanied by theoretical and
practical exercises as well as case studies with real data. In the ex-
Methods
ercises, students will deepen the material discussed in the lecture,
apply the methods in practice, and present the result.
Form of assessment Oral examination
Admission requirements
Homework assignments (pass at least 2 assignments)
for assessment
Duration of assessment 25 minutes
Language English
Offering Spring semester
Lecturer Prof. Dr. Rainer Gemulla
Person in charge Prof. Dr. Rainer Gemulla
Duration of module 1 Semester
Further modules -
M.Sc. Wirtschaftsinformatik, M.Sc. Mannheim Master in Data Sci-
Range of application
ence
Semester 2nd/3rd semester
58IE 684 Web Mining Project
Form of module Project
Type of module Specialization course
Level Master
ECTS 3
Hours per semester: 28 h (2 SWS)
Workload Self-study: 56 h per semester
• 36 h: project work
• 20 h: report writing and presentation preparation
Programming skills in Java or Python. IE 671 Web Mining (recom-
Prerequisites
mended).
The Web Mining project allows students to apply the methods and
techniques that they have learned in the lecture Web Mining in the
context of a practical integration project. The projects can cover any
of the topic of Web usage, content or structure mining.
Aim of module
NOTE: It is highly recommended to attend the module IE 671 “Web
Mining” in the same semester since the schedule and topics of both
modules are aligned.
Expertise:
• Students will be able to identify opportunities for employing
Web Mining techniques in business applications and will learn
to apply appropriate techniques for mining Web data.
(MK1, MF1)
Methodological competence:
Learning outcomes and • Participants will acquire practical knowledge of techniques for
qualification goals mining Web data.
• Project organization skills
(MK2, MF3, MF4, MKO3)
Personal competence:
• Presentation skills
• Team work skills
(MKO2, MF2)
Media Slide set with references to potential topics, datasets, etc.
• Bing Liu: Web Data Mining. 2nd Edition, Springer, 2011.
• Wouter de Nooy, et al.: Exploratory Social Network Analysis
Literature with Pajek. 2nd Edition, Cambridge University Press, 2011.
• Bing Liu. Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining, Morgan &
Claypool Publishers, 2012.
59Students work on their projects in teams and report about the re-
Methods sults of their projects in the form of a written report as well as an
oral presentation.
Project report (70%, 5-15 pages in length), oral project presenta-
Form of assessment
tion (30%, 10-90 minutes).
Admission requirements for
-
assessment
4-6 weeks (execution of the project work and writing of the re-
Duration of assessment
port), 10-90 minutes (presentation).
Language English
Offering Spring semester
Lecturer Prof. Dr. Christian Bizer
Person in charge Prof. Dr. Christian Bizer
Duration of module 1 semester
Further modules -
M.Sc. Wirtschaftsinformatik, Mannheim Master in Data Science
Range of application
Lehramt Informatik, MMSDS
Semester 1. /2. /3. Semester
60