Foreword
This document describes the courses that will be offered in academic year HWS 2023/ FSS 2024 for
students studying M. Sc. Business Informatics (Examination Regulations for the Master’s Program from
12th December 2017). You can find the Examination Regulations on the website of the Student Services
(Studienbüros):
https://www.uni-mannheim.de/en/academics/during-your-studies/examinations/examination-
regulations/
It is possible that additional courses will be made available during the course of the academic year.
These will be published in an appendix available on the following web page:
https://www.wim.uni-mannheim.de/studium/studienorganisation/m-sc-business-informatics/
3

iii. IS-Courses
Please check the course list on page 26.
For a detailed description please use the module catalog of the „Mannheim Master in
Management “:
https://www.bwl.uni-mannheim.de/en/programs/master/mmm/module-catalogs-2011-
2020/
75

Part 2: Abbreviations
Explanation of abbreviations
Knowledge
The courses are divided into two groups – fundamental courses and specialization courses. After
studying mandatory fundamental courses in computer science and business administration, in their
advanced courses students can focus on the concepts and methods of computers science, the
application of these methods in system design and development, or on the use of information
technology in business processes. In addition to the regular lecture courses, students participate in a
team project.
During their studies -
(MK1) all students develop a deep understanding of the relevant concepts, methods and
problem-solving strategies used in different application domains.
(MK2) technology-oriented students learn the concepts, algorithms and strategies used to
solve concrete, practical application-oriented problems in business informatics.
(MK3) business-oriented students develop a deep understanding of how to deploy, develop
and manage information systems.
As part of this education, students become familiar with a wide range of models, modelling
languages, methods, and tools. Students also learn how to collect, structure, manipulate, prepare,
communicate, and use data, information, and knowledge to define and control processes in
companies and industrial scenarios.
Capabilities
After completing their studies, students have the ability to –
(MF1) apply a wide range of abstraction and analysis techniques.
(MF2) understand, interpret, describe, and present relevant scientific publications.
(MF3) exploit the latest scientific results.
(MF4) independently tackle problems in business informatics and describe their results in a
structured, written form.
123(MF5) continue their studies at the PhD level, if their results are of sufficient quality.
Competencies
After completing their studies, students have the competences needed to –
(MKO1) apply their knowledge and capabilities to solve specific problems in a team context.
(MKO2) use their interdisciplinary education to mediate between technical and non-technical
individuals.
(MKO3) to evaluate the latest changes in programming languages, systems, business models
and process models and, wherever possible, exploit them to develop better solutions
to business informatics problems.
124

