2. Detailed descriptions
i. Fundamentals Computer Science
Advanced Software Engineering (Software Testing and
CS 500
Experimentation)
Form of module Lectures, exercises and tutorials
Type of module Computer Science Fundamental
Level Master
ECTS 6
Hours per semester present: 56 h (2 + 2 SWS)
Self-study: 112 h per semester
Workload
• 28 h per semester for preparation and studying of
lectures/tutorials
• 84 h per semester for the preparation of the exams
Prerequisites Knowledge of Java and/or Python
The course introduces the fundamental concepts and
practices of software testing, and software experimentation /
evaluation
• Principles of Testing
Aim of module • Test Coverage Criteria
• Test specification techniques
• Model-based testing
• Principles of Experimentation
• Using Software Observatoriums
Expertise:
Students will be familiar with principles, approaches and tools
for testing software and the methods and empirically
evaluating software products, methods and tools
(MK1, MK2)
Learning outcomes and Methodological competence:
qualification goals Students will have the ability to judge, select, and apply
traditional or non-traditional test tools and techniques to
evaluate software quality, as well as to design and perform
software experiments.
(MF1) (MF1, MF3)
Personal competence:
6Students will have improved skills in analytical thinking and
applying theoretical knowledge to solve practical problems,
especially in software testing and experimentation.
(MKO3)
Lecture notes, presentations, tool demonstrations, software,
Media
data sets
• Paul Ammann & Jeff Offutt., “Introduction to Software
Literature
Testing”, Cambridge University Press, January 2008.
Lectures, weekly exercises, experimentation with different
Methods
systems
Form of assessment Written examination
Admission requirements
-
for assessment
Duration of assessment 90 minutes
Language English
Offering Fall semester
Lecturer Dr. Marcus Kessel, Prof. Dr. Colin Atkinson
Person in charge Prof. Dr. Colin Atkinson
Duration of module 1 Semester
Further modules Model-Driven
M.Sc. Wirtschaftsinformatik, M.Sc. Mannheim Master in Data
Range of application
Science, Lehramt Informatik
Semester 1st or 2nd semester
7Datenbanksysteme II
CS 530
Database Systems II (DBSII)
Form der Veranstaltung Vorlesung mit Übung
Typ der Veranstaltung Vertiefung
Modulniveau Master
ECTS 6
Präsenzstudium: 4SWS
Eigenstudium: 56h pro Semester
Arbeitsaufwand
• davon Vor- und Nachbereitung der Veranstaltung und
freies Selbststudium: 28h pro Semester
• davon Vorbereitung für die Prüfung: 28 h pro Semester
Vorausgesetzte
PI2, Algorithmen und Datenstrukturen, DBSI, C, C++
Kenntnisse
Implementierung von Hauptspeicherdatenbanksystemen
Lehrinhalte
Fachkompetenz:
• effiziente C/C++ Programme entwickeln
• physische Algebra
• Implementierung von Indexstrukturen
(MK1, MK3)
Lern- und
Methodenkompetenz:
Kompetenzziele
• Analyse komplexer Algorithmen
(MF1)
Personale Kompetenz:
• Praezises Analysieren
(MKO1, MKO3)
Medienformen Präsentationen mit Tafelanschrieb
Begleitende Literatur Skript
Lehr- und
Vorlesung (2 SWS)
Lernmethoden
Art der Prüfungsleistung Schriftliche Prüfung
Prüfungsvorleistung -
Prüfungsdauer 90 Minuten (schriftliche Prüfung)
Sprache Deutsch
Angebotsturnus FSS (nicht im FSS 2024)
8Lehrende/r Moerkotte
Modulverantwortlicher Moerkotte
Dauer des Moduls 1 Semester
Weiterführende Module -
Verwendbarkeit M.Sc. Wirtschaftsinformatik
Einordnung in
1./2./3. Fachsemester
Fachsemester
9CS 550 Algorithmics
Form of module Lecture with tutorials
Type of module Fundamental in Computer Science
Level Master
ECTS 6
Attendance: 56 h per semester (4 h per week)
Self-study: 112 h per semester
Workload
• 28 h per semester for preparation and reworking of
lectures/tutorials
• 84 h per semester for the preparation of the exams
Practical Informatics I, Algorithms and Data Structures, Linear
Prerequisites
Algebra, Statistics
The lecture deals with the design and the analysis of
algorithms for various practically relevant computational
problems and with methods for analyzing the complexity of
certain problems. In particular, we will learn methods of
formalizing discrete optimization problems and designing
algorithms for them on the basis of analyzing the structure of
these problems.
Moreover, we will learn techniques for proving the
correctness and estimating the running time of these
algorithms. In the second part of the lecture, we will deal
Aim of module with the theory of NP-completeness with gives evidence that
certain highly relevant problems do not have efficient
algorithms. During the lecture we will derive algorithms and
complexity-theoretic results for the following computational
problems:
• shortest path problems and shortest round tour problems
• linear optimization problems
• flow problem
• matching problems
• satisfiability problems
• discret linear optimization problems
Professional expertise:
Learning outcomes and
The students know efficient algorithms and the most
qualification goals
important complexity-theoretic results for a number of
10computational problems which are highly relevant in
practice.
(MK1, MK2)
Methodological competence: The students learn to formalize
informally specified computational problems, to analyse their
structure with the goal to design efficient algorithms, to
prove the correctness and to analyse the running time of
given algorithms. Moreover, they learn to prove the NP-
completeness of certain problems.
(MF1, MF3)
Personal competence: Training of analytical, focussed, and
precise thinking. Further development of abstraction abilities
and the ability to transfer theoretical knowledge for solving
practical problems, especially in the field of operations
research. Increasing the sensitivity for the complexity and the
efficient solvability of computational problems, especially
through dealing with the theory of NP-completeness.
(MF1, MKO3)
Writing with chalk at the blackboard, slides, and electronic
Media
media
• Cormen, Leiserson, Rivest, Stein: Introduction to
Algorithms, 3rd edition
• Shimon Even: Graph Algorithms
• Lovasz, Plummer: Matching Theory
Literature • Handbooks on Operations Research and Management
Science Volume 7 (Editors: Ball, Magnati, Monma,
Nemhauser)
• J. Toran: Das Erfüllbarkeitsproblem SAT, Lehmann Media,
2012
Reworking of lectures and tutorials, self-studies with
Methods literature, solving exercises at home and in cooperation with
other students at the tutorials
Form of assessment Written examination
Admission requirements
-
for assessment
Duration of assessment 90 Minutes
Language English
11Offering Spring semester
Lecturer Prof. Dr. Matthias Krause
Person in charge Prof. Dr. Matthias Krause
Duration of module 1 semester
Further modules CS 651 – Cryptography II
M.Sc. Wirtschaftsinformatik, M.Sc. Mannheim Master in Data
Science, M.Sc. Wirtschaftsmathematik, M.Sc.
Range of application
Wirtschaftspädagogik, Lehramt Informatik, M.Sc.
Mathematik
Semester 1./ 2. semester
12CS 560 Large-Scale Data Management
Form of module Lecture with exercises
Type of module Computer Science Fundamental
Level Master
ECTS 6
In presence: 56 h (4 SWS)
Workload
Exercises and self-study: 98 h
Very good knowledge of database systems, good knowledge of
Prerequisites
algorithms and data structures as well as Java programming
This course introduces the fundamental concepts and computational
paradigms of large-scale data management and Big Data. This includes
methods for storing, updating, querying, and analyzing large dataset as
well as for data-intensive computing. The course covers concept,
algorithms, and system issues; accompanying exercises provide hands-
on experience. Topics include:
Aim of module
• Parallel and distributed databases
• Big Data Processing (including MapReduce, Spark)
• NoSQL databases
• Cloud databases
• Stream processing (tentative)
• Graph processing (tentative)
Expertise:
Students will acquire knowledge about methods and systems for
managing large datasets and data-intensive computing.
(MK1, MK2)
Methodological competence:
Learning outcomes and • Be able to judge, select, and use traditional or non-traditional data
qualification goals management systems for a given data management task
• Be able to solve computational problems involving large datasets
(MF1)
Personal competence:
• Study independently
• Presentation and writing skills
(MKO3)
Media Slide set, black board, exercise sheets, datasets, software
• T. Öszu, P. Valduriez
Literature
Principles of Distributed Database Systems
13Springer, 4th ed., 2020
• H. Garcia-Molina, J. D. Ullman, J. Widom
Database Systems: The Complete Book
Prentice Hall, 2nd ed., 2008
• More in lecture notes
Methods Lecture, weekly exercise, experimentation with different systems
Form of assessment Written examination
Duration of assessment 90 minutes
Language English
Offering Fall semester
Lecturer Prof. Dr. Rainer Gemulla
Person in charge Prof. Dr. Rainer Gemulla
Duration of module 1 semester
Further modules -
M.Sc. Wirtschaftsinformatik, M.Sc. Mannheim Master in Data Science,
Range of application
Lehramt Informatik
Semester 1st / 2nd semester
14CS 652 Data Security and Privacy
Form of module Inverted classroom with exercises
Type of module Fundamental in Computer Science
Level Master
ECTS 6
Hours per semester present: 56h (4 SWS)
Workload
Self-study: 112h
There are no formal prerequisites but knowledge in
cryptography or IT-security is recommended, e.g., by
Prerequisites
attending the lectures “Kryptographie I” or “Selected Topics
in IT-Security”
Nowadays, users are more and more revealing data to the
outside – either willingly as in the context of data mining or
possibly unconsciously as in the case of the Internet of
Things. The aim of the module is to raise awareness, in
particular with respect to privacy violations. This is done by
showing various security threats, e.g., traces left on the
Aim of module
Internet such as the use of cookies or browser fingerprinting.
In particular, the topic of privacy preservation will be
covered. This includes discussing different approaches for
defining the meaning of privacy but also possible
countermeasures such as anonymization of data or the use of
dedicated encryption schemes.
Expertise:
Students will acquire the knowledge to identify security and
privacy threats and to select and use appropriate
countermeasures.
(MK2)
Learning outcomes and Methodological competence:
qualification goals Successful participants will be able to understand, to select,
apply and evaluate the most appropriate techniques for a
variety of different privacy-sensitive scenarios. In particular
they are able to realize possible risks in new scenarios and to
transfer given solutions to these.
(MK1)
15Personal competence:
The analytic, concentrated, and precise thinking of the
students is trained. By the independent treatment of
applications, e.g. in the course of the exercises, their
abstraction capacity is further developed and the transfer of
the learned material to related questions is trained.
(MF1, MKO3)
Media Video recordings, annotated lecture slides
Literature Will be announced in the lecture
Reworking the lecture and studying the relevant literature in
self-study. During the lecture: discussing questions and ideas
Methods and working together on concrete examples. Solving
exercises in self-study and in practice in cooperation with
fellow students.
Form of assessment Written exam
Admission requirements
-
for assessment
Duration of assessment 90 minutes
Language English
FSS (in FSS24 this course will only be offered as online-course
Offering
in form of videos)
Lecturer Prof. Dr. Frederik Armknecht
Person in charge Prof. Dr. Frederik Armknecht
Duration of module 1 semester
Further modules -
M.Sc. Mannheim Master in Data Science,
Range of application M.Sc. Wirtschaftsinformatik, Lehramt Informatik,
M.Sc. Mathematik
Semester 1st/2nd/3rd semester
16IE 500 Data Mining
Form of module Lecture with exercises and project
Type of module Business Informatics Fundamental
Level Master
ECTS 6
Hours per semester: 56 h (4 SWS)
Workload Self-study per semester: 98 h
• 70 h: pre and post lecture studying and revision
• 28 h: examination preparation
Prerequisites Foundations of Statistics, Practical Informatics I
The course provides an introduction to advanced data
analysis techniques as a basis for analyzing business data and
providing input for decision support systems. The course will
cover the following topics:
• Goals and Principles of Data Mining
Aim of module • Data Representation and Preprocessing
• Classification
• Regression
• Cluster Analysis
• Association Analysis
• Practical Data Mining using Python
Expertise:
Students will acquire basic knowledge of the techniques,
opportunities, and applications of data mining. (MK1, MF1)
Methodological competence:
• Successful participants will be able to identify
opportunities for applying data mining in an enterprise
Learning outcomes and
environment, select and apply appropriate techniques,
qualification goals
and interpret the results.
• project organization skills
(MK2, MF3, MF4, MKO1)
Personal competence:
• team work skills
• presentation skills
(MKO2, MF2)
17Slide set, exercise sheets, Jupyter notebooks, data sets for
Media
the exercises, lecture videos
• Pang-Ning Tan, Michael Steinback, Vipin Kumar:
Introduction to Data Mining, 2nd Edition, Pearson.
Literature
• Aurélien Géron: Hands-on Machine Learning with Scikit-
Learn, Keras & TensorFlow, 3rd Edition, O’Reilly.
The course consists of a lecture together with accompanying
practical exercises as well as student team projects. In the
exercises the participants will gather initial expertise in
applying state of the art data mining tools on realistic data
Methods sets. The group projects take place in the last third of the
term. Within the projects, students implement advanced
data mining projects of personal choice and report about the
results of their projects in the form of a written report as well
as an oral presentation.
Written examination (75%), project report (20%), oral project
Form of assessment
presentation (5%)
Admission requirements
-
for assessment
60 minutes (written examination), 5-11 pages (project
Duration of assessment
report), 5-15 minutes (oral project presentation)
Language English
Offering Fall semester / Spring semester
Lecturer Prof. Dr. Heiko Paulheim; Prof. Dr. Christian Bizer
Person in charge Prof. Dr. Heiko Paulheim; Prof. Dr. Christian Bizer
Duration of module 1 Semester
IE 675b – Machine Learning, IE 678 – Deep Learning,
Further modules IS 661 – Text Analytics, CS 646 – Higher Level Computer
Vision, IE 671 – Web Mining
M.Sc. Wirtschaftsinformatik, M.Sc. Mannheim Master in Data
Range of application
Science, Lehramt Informatik
Semester 1st/2nd semester
18IE 560 Decision Support
Form of module Inverted classroom
Type of module Business Informatics Fundamental
Level Master
ECTS 6
Hours per semester: 42 h (1+2 SWS)
Workload Self-study per semester: 138 h
• 89 h: pre- and post lecture studying and revision
• 49 h: exam preparation
Basic Probability Theory, Basic Knowledge of Propositional
Prerequisites
and First-Order Logic
The course provides an introduction to decision support
techniques as a basis for the design of decision support
systems. The course will cover the following topics:
• Decision Theory
Aim of module
• Decision- and Business Rules
• Probabilistic Graphical Models
• Game Theory and Mechanism Design
• Decision Processes and Reinforcement Learning
Expertise:
Students will acquire basic knowledge of the techniques,
opportunities, and applications of decision theory.
(MK1, MF1)
Learning outcomes and Methodological competence:
qualification goals Successful participants will be able to identify opportunities
for decision support in an enterprise environment, select and
apply appropriate techniques, and interpret the results.
(MK2, MF3, MF4, MKO1)
Personal competence: -
Media Lecture videos, slide set, exercise sheets, software tools
• S. Russel and P. Norvig: AI a modern Approach (3rd
Literature
Edition), 2010 (selected sections)
The course consists of a lecture accompanied by practical
Methods
homework and case studies. In the lecture, the students’
19basic concepts and methods of decision theory will be
explained both in theory and using concrete examples. The
students will practice and test their knowledge acquired in
the lecture in homework assignments. Within the case
studies, students model real world decision problems and try
to solve them optimally using methods from the lecture.
Form of assessment Written exam
Admission requirements
-
for assessment
Duration of assessment Written examina: 90 minutes
Language English
Offering Fall semester
Lecturer Prof. Dr. Heiner Stuckenschmidt
Person in charge Prof. Dr. Heiner Stuckenschmidt
Duration of module 1 Semester
Further modules -
M.Sc. Wirtschaftsinformatik, M.Sc. Mannheim Master in Data
Range of application
Science,
Semester 1st/2nd semester
20