2. Detailed descriptions
i. CS-Courses
CS 600 Model Driven Development
Form of module Lectures with accompanying tutorials
Type of module Specialization course
Level Master
ECTS 6
Hours per semester present at university: 56 h (4 SWS)
Self-study: 112 h semester
Workload • 28 h: pre and post lecture studying and revision
• 56 h: tutorial exercises
• 28 h: directed independent study (reading papers, books
etc.)
Prerequisites • Software Testing and Experimentation
The course focuses on the principles, practices and tools
involved in advanced model-driven development. This
includes established modelling standard languages (e. g. UML,
ATL, OCL) and modelling infrastructures (e. g. MOF, EMF, …) as
well as leading edge, state-of-the-art modelling technologies
(e. g. LML, PLM . . . ). Key topics addressed include:
• Principles of Model-Driven Development
Aim of module
• Meta-Modeling
• Domain-Specific Languages
• Model Constraint and Transformation languages
• Multi-View/Multi-Paradigm Modeling
• Multi-Level Modeling
• Ontology Modeling
• Enterprise Architecture Modeling
Expertise:
Students will be familiar with the accepted best practices and
Learning outcomes and technologies used in mainstream model-driven development
qualification goals as well as state-of-the-art modeling technologies emerging
from research institutions.
(MK1, MK2)
25Methodological competence:
Students will know how to apply modeling technologies in
real-world projects.
(MF1, MF3)
Personal competence:
Students will have the capability to analyse, understand and
model complex systems.
(MKO1)
Media Printed Lecture Notes, Presentations, Tool Demonstrations
• Jos B. Warmer and Anneke G. Kleppe, The Object
Literature Constraint Language: Getting Your Models Ready for MDA,
Addison-Wesley Object Technology Series, 2003
Methods Lectures, tutorials, independent study
Form of assessment Written examination
Admission requirements
-
for assessment
Duration of assessment 90 minutes
Language English
Offering Fall semester
Lecturer Prof. Dr. Colin Atkinson
Person in charge Prof. Dr. Colin Atkinson
Duration of module 1 semester
Further modules -
M.Sc. Wirtschaftsinformatik, M.Sc. Mannheim Master in Data
Range of application
Science, Lehramt Informatik
Semester 2nd, 3rd or 4th semester
26CS 646 Higher Level Computer Vision
Form of module Lecture with Exercise
Type of module Specialization Course
Level Master
ECTS 6
Hours per semester present: 56 (4SWS)
Workload Self-study: 98h
• 70h lecture/exercises
• 28h exam preparation
Prerequisites Basis skills in linear algebra, basis knowledge in python and pytorch
• Point Features and point matching
• Object Identification
• Deep Learning for Computer Vision
Aim of module • Object Detection
• Image Segmentation
• Optical Flow
• Video and Motion Segmentation
Expertise: The students have a detailed understanding of Computer
Vision techniques. They can evaluate given Computer Vision
algorithms.
(MK1, MK2, MF1, MF3)
Methodological competence: Students understand the technical
Learning outcomes and basis of Computer Vision algorithms; they can explain the discussed
qualification goals methods and implement them.
(MF1, MF2, MF3)
Personal competence: Understanding complex Computer Vision
problems; thorough judgment in the design and use of methods; can
work efficiently in a team.
(MK01, MK02)
Media Exercise sheets and lecture slides available online.
27• Goodfellow et al..: Deep Learning, MIT Press, 2016.
https://www.deeplearningbook.org/
• R. Szeliski: Computer Vision Algorithms and Applications,
Springer, 2010. ISBN: 978-1-84882-934-3. (Online available:
http://szeliski.org/Book/
Literature • D. Forsyth, J. Ponce: Computer Vision: A Modern Approach,
Prentice Hall, 2nd edition, 2012. ISBN: 978-0136085928 (Online
available: http://cmuems.com/excap/readings/forsyth-ponce-
computer-vision-a-modern-approach.pdf
• R. Hartley, A. Zisserman: Multiple View Geometry in Computer
Vision, Cambridge University Press, 2nd edition, 2004.
Lecture, weekly exercise, book studies, implementation of
Methods
algorithms, visualization of results
Form of assessment Written or oral examination (TBA)
Admission requirements for
-
assessment
Duration of assessment 90 minutes (written) or 20 minutes (oral)
Language English
Offering Fall semester
Lecturer Professor Dr.-Ing. Margret Keuper
Person in charge Professor Dr.-Ing. Margret Keuper
Duration of module 1 Semester
Further modules Image Processing
M. Sc. Wirtschaftsinformatik, M.Sc. Mannheim Master in Data
Range of application
Science, Lehramt Informatik
Semester 1st/2nd/3rd semester
28CS 647 Image Processing
Form of module Lecture with Exercise (partially online)
Type of module Specializaton Course
Level Master
ECTS 6
Hours per semester present: 56 (4SWS)
Workload Self-study: 98h
• 70h lecture/exercises
• 28h exam preparation
Prerequisites Basis skills in linear algebra, basis knowledge in python
• Introduction to Imaging (human visual system, optics, sensors)
• Noise and basic operations (convolution, correlations, gradients)
• Energy minimization
• Variational Methods
Aim of module • Feature extraction
• Classification
• Segmentation
• Image Sequences and Motion (Optical Flow)
• Stereo Vision
Expertise: The students have a detailed understanding of image and
video processing techniques. They can evaluate given image processing
algorithms.
(MK1, MK2, MF1, MF3)
Methodological competence: Students understand the technical basis of
Learning outcomes and image processing algorithms; they can explain the discussed methods
qualification goals and implement them.
(MF1, MF2, MF3)
Personal competence: Understanding complex Image Processing
problems; thorough judgment in the design and use of methods; can
work efficiently in a team.
(MK01, MK02)
Media Exercise sheets and lecture slides available online.
• R. Szeliski: Computer Vision Algorithms and Applications, Springer,
2010. ISBN: 978-1-84882-934-3. (Online available:
Literature http://szeliski.org/Book/)
• D. Forsyth, J. Ponce: Computer Vision: A Modern Approach, Prentice
Hall, 2nd edition, 2012. ISBN: 978-0136085928
29Lecture, weekly exercise, book studies, implementation of algorithms,
Methods
visualization of results
Form of assessment Written or oral examination (TBA)
Admission requirements
-
for assessment
Duration of assessment 90 minutes (written) or 20 minutes (oral)
Language English
Offering Fall Semester/ Spring Semester
Lecturer Professor Dr.-Ing. Margret Keuper
Person in charge Professor Dr.-Ing. Margret Keuper
Duration of module 1 Semester
Further modules Higher Level Computer Vision
M. Sc. Wirtschaftsinformatik, M.Sc. Mannheim Master in Data Science,
Range of application
Lehramt Informatik
Semester 1st/2nd/3rd semester
30CS 651 Cryptography II
Form of module Inverted classroom
Type of module Specialization course
Level Master
ECTS 6
Hours per semester present: 56h (4 SWS)
Self-study: 112h
Even though the lecture deepens and continues topics
Workload
discussed in “CS 404 Cryptography I”, it is not a prerequisite
Prerequisites
to have attended this lecture. The lecture “Cryptography II”
can be studied without any prior knowledge on cryptography
– all necessary basics are shortly recapitulated.
The goal of this lecture is to present and discuss important
scientific concepts from modern cryptography. This includes:
• Security Definitions: How can the security of
cryptographic schemes formally defined?
• Proofs of Security: How can the security of cryptographic
Aim of module
schemes be proven (based on precise assumptions)?
• Cryptanalysis: What are the established techniques to
analyze cryptographic mechanisms?
• Elliptic Curves
• Zero-Knowledge Proofs
Expertise:
With the help of current techniques and theories of modern
cryptography, the students can assess the security of
cryptographic processes and assess security statements
accordingly. Furthermore, they can identify security goals
and use appropriate techniques that could not be dealt with
in “CS 404 Cryptography I”.
(MK2)
Methodological competence:
Learning outcomes and The students can select and use suitable methods for the
qualification goals security analysis of cryptographic processes. This includes, for
example, the choice of the appropriate security model, proof
of security based on clearly specified assumptions and the
analysis of given procedures. In particular, the students can
understand and assess the security arguments for existing
procedures and to transfer them to new ones. Furthermore,
they can use techniques and protocols to achieve security
goals that were not yet possible with the methods discussed
in “CS 404 Cryptography I”.
(MK1)
31Personal competence:
The analytic, concentrated, and precise thinking of the students is
trained. By the independent treatment of applications, e.g. in the
course of the exercises, their abstraction capacity is further
developed and the transfer of the learned material to related
questions is trained.
(MF1, MKO3)
Media Video recordings, annotated lecture slides
Jonathan Katz, Yehuda Lindell: Introduction to Modern
Literature Cryptography: Principles and Protocols, Chapman and
Hall/CRC, 2007.
Reworking the lecture and studying the relevant literature in
self-study. During the lecture: discussing questions and ideas
Methods and working together on concrete examples. Solving
exercises in self-study and in practice in cooperation with
fellow students.
Form of assessment Oral exam
Admission requirements
none
for assessment
Duration of assessment 30 minutes
Language English
Offering HWS
Lecturer Prof. Dr. Frederik Armknecht
Person in charge Prof. Dr. Frederik Armknecht
Duration of module One term
Further modules none
M.Sc. Mannheim Master in Data Science,
Range of application M.Sc. Wirtschaftsinformatik, Lehramt Informatik,
M.Sc. Mathematik
Semester 1st/2nd/3rd semester
32CS 655 Cryptography
Form of Module Lecture with Exercise
Type of Module Specialization Course
Level Master
ECTS 6
Hours per semester present: 56 (4 SWS)
Workload
Self-study: 98h (70h lectures/exercises, 28h exam
preparation
Basis skills in linear algebra, probability theory, algorithms,
Prerequisites
and data structures
• Basic concepts of cryptography
• Mathematical Background
• Basics of Information Theory
• Block Ciphers (DES, AES, etc.)
• Stream Ciphers
Aim of Module
• Secure Key Exchange Protocols (Diffie-Hellman protocol,
etc.)
• Public Key encryption (RSA)
• Cryptographic Hash Functions
• Signature Systems and Message Authentication Codes
Expertise:
After the course the students are able to identify security
risks in various modern scenarios of data traffic like online
banking, wireless communication, online trade ...
(MK1)
Methodological competence:
The students are able to formulate and formalize
Learning Outcomes and security goals for various use cases and to choose and to
qualification goals apply appropriate methods to
reach these goals.
Examples here are to provide data security data encryption,
to establish trusted electronical
data encryption, to establish trusted electronical
communication channels, or to apply methods for secure
authentication
(MF1)
33Personal competence:
The course trains abstract thinking and the ability to
formally model application scenarios. By solving exercises
independently, the transfer of the learned material to
related questions is promoted.
Media Exercise sheets and lecture slides available online, blackboard
• Christof Paar, Bart Preneel, Jan Pelzl: Understanding
Cryptography: A Terxtbook for Students and
Practitioners, Springer 2009
Literature • Douglas R. Stinson: Cryptography - Theory and Practice,
Taylor & Francis, 2005
• Alan G. Konheim: Cryptography: A Primer, John Wiley &
Sons, 1981
Methods Lecture, exercises every two weeks, book studies
Form of assessment Oral examination
Admission requirements
-
for assessment
Duration of assessment 15 – 30 minutes
Language English
Offering FSS
Person in Charge Prof. Dr. Matthias Krause
Duration of Module 1 Semester
Further Modules Cryptography II
M.Sc Business Informatics, M.Sc Data Science, Lehramt
Range of Application
Informatik, B.Sc. Wirtschaftsmathematik
Semester 1st/2nd/3rd Semester
34CS 662 Types and Programming Languages
Form of module Lecture with Exercise
Type of module Specialization Course
Level Master
ECTS 6
Hours per semester present: 56h (4 SWS)
Workload
Self-study: 112h
Prerequisites -
A type system is a syntactic method for enforcing levels of
abstraction in programs. The study of type systems—and of
programming languages from a type-theoretic perspective—has
important applications in software engineering, language design,
high-performance compilers, and security. In this lecture, we will
discuss the following topics:
Aim of module • Lambda calculus
• Static and dynamic semantics of programming languages
• Functional programming
• Curry-Howard correspondence
• Computational logic
• Proof assistants
• Typed intermediate languages
Expertise:
• Get acquainted with the aims of the module
(MK1, MK2, MF1, MF3)
Methodological competence:
• Students will get familiar with the jargon used in scientific
Learning outcomes and publications about programming languages
qualification goals (MF1, MF2, MF3)
Personal competence:
• Learn how to read scientific publications about
programming languages
• Teamwork skills
(MKO1, MKO2)
Lecture slides, exercise sheets, project assignments, software,
Media
software documentation
35Types and Programming Languages. February 2002. Benjamin C.
Literature
Pierce. The MIT Press. ISBN: 978-0-262-16209-8
• Lecture
Methods
• Weekly Exercises/programming projects
Form of assessment Written examination (90 minutes)
Admission requirements
≥ 50% points in homework assignments in groups of 2-3 students
for assessment
Duration of assessment 90 minutes written exam
Language English
Offering FSS
Lecturer Junior Professor Dr. Roland Leißa
Person in charge Junior Professor Dr. Roland Leißa
Duration of module 1 semester
Further modules -
M. Sc. Wirtschaftsinformatik, Lehramt Informatik, MMDS,
Range of application
MMSDS
Semester 1st/2nd/3rd semester
36