CS 664 Blockchain Security
Form of module
Inverted classroom with exercises
Type of module
Specialization course
ECTS 6
Workload Hours per semester present: 56h (4 SWS), Self-study: 112h
There are no formal prerequisites but knowledge in
cryptography and/or IT-security is recommended, e.g., by
Prerequisites
attending the lectures “Kryptographie I” or “Selected Topics in
IT-Security”
Blockchains promise secure and reliable data storage and
consensus in a trustless environment. In the light of their
growing popularity, Blockchain security becomes increasingly
important. The course will equip students with a solid
Aim of module understanding of blockchains, their design principles,
underlying technologies, and cryptographic primitives. Bitcoin,
Monero and Ethereum will be discussed in greater detail and a
substantial part of the course will be devoted to security issues
and possible attacks.
Expertise:
Students will acquire profound knowledge of Blockchain
technology as well as the skills to critically examine the
security of Blockchain-based systems.
(MK1, MK2)
Methodological competence:
Successful participants will be able to understand and evaluate
the different ways in which different Blockchain systems try to
achieve security. They will also be able to identify where, why,
Learning outcomes and
and how these security measures are broken for both, current
qualification goals
and new systems.
(MKO3)
Personal competence:
The analytic, concentrated, and precise thinking of the
students is trained. As multiple different but related
Blockchains are discussed, their abstraction capacity is further
developed and the transfer of the learned concepts to related
questions is trained.
(MF1)
Media Video recordings, annotated lecture slides
Literature Will be announced in the lecture
37Reworking the lecture and studying the relevant literature in
self-study. During the lecture: discussing questions and ideas
Methods and working together on concrete examples. Solving exercises
in self-study and in practice in cooperation with fellow
students.
Form of assessment Written exam
Admission requirements
-
for assessment
Duration of assessment 90 Minutes
Language English
Offering HWS
Lecturer Prof. Dr. Frederik Armknecht
Person in charge Prof. Dr. Frederik Armknecht
Duration of Module 1 Semester
Further Modules -
M.Sc. Mannheim Master in Data Science,
M.Sc. Wirtschaftsinformatik
Range of application Lehramt Informatik
M.Sc. Mathematik
M.Sc. Wirtschaftsmathematik
Semester 1st/2nd/3rd semester
38CS 668 Generative Computer Vision Models
Form of module Lecture with Exercise
Type of module Specialization Course
Level Master
ECTS 6
Hours per semester present: 56 (4SWS)
Workload Self-study: 98h
• 70h lecture/exercises
• 28h exam preparation
Prerequisites Basis skills in linear algebra, basis knowledge in python/pytorch
• Introduction to Clustering and Unsupervised Learning
• Introduction to Generative Models
• Autoregressive Models for Image Generation
• (Normalizing) Flow
Aim of module
• Latent Variable Models
• Latent Space Visualizations
• Generative Adversarial Models
• Diffusion Models
• Multi-Modal Conditioning
Expertise: The students have a detailed understanding of image
generation techniques, latent variable models, and their
evaluations.
(MK1, MK2, MF1, MF3)
Methodological competence: Students understand the technical
basis of generative models; they can explain the discussed
Learning outcomes and
methods and implement them.
qualification goals
(MF1, MF2, MF3)
Personal competence: Understanding image generative models,
their working principles and training procedures; thorough
judgment in the design and use of methods; Students can work
efficiently in a team.
(MK01, MK02)
39Media Exercise sheets and lecture slides available online.
• Ian Goodfellow and Yoshua Bengio and Aaron Courville, Deep
Literature
Learning, An MIT press book, 2016.
Lecture, weekly exercise, book studies, implementation of
Methods
algorithms, visualization of results
Form of assessment
Written or oral examination (TBA)
Admission requirements
-
for assessment
Duration of assessment
90 minutes (written) or 20 minutes (oral)
Language
English
Offering
Spring Semester
Lecturer
Professor Dr.-Ing. Margret Keuper
Person in charge
Professor Dr.-Ing. Margret Keuper
Duration of module
1 Semester
Further modules
Higher Level Computer Vision
M. Sc. Wirtschaftsinformatik, M.Sc. Mannheim Master in Data
Range of application
Science, Lehramt Informatik
Semester
1st/2nd/3rd semester
40CS 630 Generative Software Engineering
Form of module Lectures, exercises and tutorials
Type of module Specialization Course
Level Master
ECTS 6
Hours per semester present: 56 h (2 + 2 SWS)
Self-study: 112 h per semester
Workload
• 28 h per semester for preparation and studying of
lectures/tutorials
• 84 h per semester for the preparation of the exams
• Software Testing and Experimentation
Prerequisites
• Knowledge of Java and/or Python
The course introduces the fundamental principles, practices
and applications of generative software engineering (GSE) as
well as the supporting models, tools and services -
• Software Recommendation and Reuse
• Code Search Engines
Aim of module
• Principles of GSE
• Existing GSE models, tools and services
• Defining GSE “problems”
• Applications of GSE
• Evaluation and comparison of GSE models, tools and services
Expertise:
Students will be familiar with the principles, practices and
applications of GSE as well as supporting models, tools and
services.
(MK1, MK2)
Methodological competence:
Students will have the ability to judge, select, and apply GSE
Learning outcomes and
techniques and tools in practical software engineers, as well
qualification goals
as the ability to understand academic GSE publications and to
perform research in GSE.
(MF1) (MF1, MF3)
Personal competence:
Students will have improved skills in analytical thinking and
applying theoretical knowledge to solve practical problems,
especially in the use of AI to enhance software engineering.
41(MKO3)
Lecture notes, presentations, tool demonstrations, software,
Media
data sets
• Sommerville, Ian. "Software engineering (10th ed.).",
Literature
Pearson Education Inc., 2018.
Lectures, weekly exercises, experimentation with different
Methods
systems
Form of assessment Written examination
Admission requirements
-
for assessment
Duration of assessment 90 minutes
Language English
Offering Spring semester
Lecturers Dr. Marcus Kessel, Prof. Dr. Colin Atkinson
Person in charge Prof. Dr. Colin Atkinson
Duration of module 1 Semester
Model-Driven Development, Software Testing and
Further modules
Experimentation
M.Sc. Wirtschaftsinformatik, M.Sc. Mannheim Master in Data
Range of application
Science, Lehramt Informatik
Semester 2nd, 3rd or 4th semester
42ii. IE-Courses
Anfrageoptimierung
IE 630
Query Optimization
Form der Veranstaltung Vorlesung mit Übung
Typ der Veranstaltung Vertiefung
Modulniveau Master
ECTS 6
Präsenzstudium: 4SWS
Eigenstudium: 56h pro Semester
Arbeitsaufwand
• davon Vor- und Nachbereitung der Veranstaltung und freies
Selbststudium: 28h pro Semester
• davon Vorbereitung für die Prüfung: 28 h pro Semester
Vorausgesetzte Kenntnisse DBSI, Kombinatorik, Statistik
• Grundlagen der Anfrageoptimierung
Lehrinhalte
Fachkompetenz:
• Suchraumgroessen abschaetzen
• Komplexitaetsanalysen
• Indexeinsatz
(MK1, MK2)
Methodenkompetenz:
Lern- und Kompetenzziele
• systematisches Auszaehlen und Aufzaehlen
• Analyse komplexer Algorithmen
(MF1, MF2, MF3, MF5)
Personale Kompetenz:
• Präzises Analysieren
(MKO1, MKO3)
Medienformen Präsentationen mit Tafelanschrieb
Begleitende Literatur Skript
Lehr- und Lernmethoden Vorlesung (2 SWS)
Art der Prüfungsleistung Mündliche Prüfung
Prüfungsvorleistung -
Prüfungsdauer 30 Minuten (mündliche Prüfung)
Sprache Deutsch
43Angebotsturnus FSS (nicht im FSS24)
Lehrende/r Moerkotte
Modulverantwortlicher Moerkotte
Dauer des Moduls 1 Semester
Weiterführende Module -
Verwendbarkeit M.Sc. Wirtschaftsinformatik
Einordnung in
1./2./3. Fachsemester
Fachsemester
44IE 663 Information Retrieval and Web Search
Form of module Lecture
Type of module Specialization course
Level Master
ECTS 3
Hours per semester present: 28h (2SWS)
Workload Self-study: 60h per semester
• Pre- and post- lecture studying and preparation (30h)
• Examination preparation (30h)
Fundamental notions of linear algebra, probability theory, as well
Prerequisites
as algorithms and data structures
Given the vastness and richness of the Web, users need high-
performing, scalable and efficient methods to access its wealth of
information and satisfy their information needs. As such, being
able to search and effectively retrieve relevant pieces of
information from large text collections is a crucial task for the
majority (if practically not all) of Web applications. In this course,
we will explore a variety of basic and advanced techniques for text-
based information retrieval and Web search. Covered topics will
include:
Aim of module
• Efficient text indexing;
• Boolean and vector space retrieval models;
• Probabilistic and semantic ad-hoc retrieval;
• Evaluation of retrieval systems;
• Text classification and clustering;
• Web search, crawling and link-based algorithms.
This course provides theoretical information retrieval foundations.
As such is highly to be attended together with the course
Information Retrieval Project (IE 691).
Expertise:
Students will acquire knowledge of fundamental techniques of
Information Retrieval and Web Search, including standard retrieval
Learning outcomes and
models, evaluation of information retrieval systems, text
qualification goals
classification and clustering, as well as web search topics such as
crawling and link-based algorithms.
(MK1, MK2, MF1)
45Methodological competence:
Successful participants will be able to understand state-of-the-art
methods for Information Retrieval and Web search, as well as
being able to select, apply and evaluate the most appropriate
techniques for a variety of different search scenarios.
(MF1, MF2, MF4)
Personal competence: -
Media Lecture slides, exercise sheets
• Christopher D. Manning, Prabhakar Raghavan and Hinrich
Schütze, Introduction to Information Retrieval, Cambridge
University Press. 2008.
Literature • B. Croft, D. Metzler, T. Strohman, Search Engines: Information
Retrieval in Practice, Addison-Wesley, 2009
• R. Baeza-Yates, B. Ribeiro-Neto, Modern Information
Retrieval, Addison-Wesley, 2011 (2nd Edition).
The course consists of (1) lectures that introduce the students to
traditional and contemporary information retrieval techniques and
Methods models, and (2) exercises in which the students are demonstrated
in terms of comprehensible examples how theoretically introduced
models work.
Form of assessment Written examination
Admission requirements for
-
assessment
Duration of assessment 90 minutes
Language English
Offering HWS
Lecturer Prof. Dr. Simone Ponzetto
Person in charge Prof. Dr. Simone Ponzetto
Duration of module 1 semester
Further modules -
Range of application M.Sc. Wirtschaftsinformatik, Lehramt Informatik, MMDS, MMSDS
Semester 1st/2nd/3rd semester
46IE 670 Web Data Integration
Form of module Lecture
Type of module Specialization course
Level Master
ECTS 3
Hours per semester: 28 h (2 SWS)
Workloadk Self-study: 56 h per semester
• 31 h: pre and post lecture studying and revision
• 25 h: examination preparation
Prerequisites -
Data integration is one of the key challenges in most IT
projects and it is estimated that data scientists spend about
80% of their time on data integration and data preparation.
Within the enterprise context, data integration problems
arise whenever data from separate sources needs to be
combined as the basis for new applications or data analysis
projects. Within the context of the Web, data integration
techniques form the foundation for taking advantage of the
ever-growing number of publicly-accessible data sources. The
course will cover the following topics:
Aim of module 1. Heterogeneity and Distributedness
2. The Data Integration Process
3. Structured Data on the Web
4. Data Exchange Formats
5. Schema Mapping and Data Translation
6. Identity Resolution
7. Data Quality Assessment
8. Data Fusion
It is highly recommended to attend the course web data
integration project in the same semester as this course as the
schedules of both courses are aligned to each other.
Expertise:
Students will be able to identify opportunities for employing
Learning outcomes and Web data in business applications and will learn to select and
qualification goals apply appropriate techniques for integrating and cleansing
Web data.
(MK1, MF1)
47Methodological competence:
• Participants will acquire knowledge of the data
integration process as well as the techniques that are
used in each phase of the process.
(MK2, MF3, MF4, MKO3)
Personal competence: -
Media slide set
• AnHai Doan, Alon Halevy, Zachary Ives: Principles of Data
Integration. Morgan Kaufmann, 2012.
• Luna Dong, Divesh Srivastava: Big Data Integration.
Literature
Morgan & Claypool, 2015.
• Ulf Leser, Felix Naumann: Informationsintegration.
Dpunkt Verlag, 2007.
The course consists of a lecture that introduces students to
Methods
state of the art data integration techniques.
Form of assessment Written examination
Admission requirements
-
for assessment
Duration of assessment 60 minutes
Language English
Offering Fall semester
Lecturer Prof. Dr. Christian Bizer
Person in charge Prof. Dr. Christian Bizer
Duration of module 1 semester
Further modules -
M.Sc. Wirtschaftsinformatik, M.Sc. Mannheim Master in Data
Range of application
Science, Lehramt Informatik
Semester 1st/2nd/3rd semester
48IE 671 Web Mining
Form of module Lecture and Exercise
Type of module Specialization course
Level Master
ECTS 3
Hours per semester: 28 h (2 SWS)
Workload Self-study: 56 h per semester
• 31 h: pre and post lecture studying and revision
• 25 h: examination and presentation preparation
IE 500 Data Mining I (recommended). Fundamental notions
Prerequisites
of linear algebra and probability theory.
The vast amounts of textual content and structured data
found on the Web provide us with a goldmine of data that
can be mined to derive knowledge about nearly every aspect
of human life. The course covers techniques for extracting
knowledge from Web content as a basis for business
decisions and applications. The course will cover the
following topics: Web Usage Mining (including Recommender
Aim of module
Systems), Web Structure Mining (including Social Network
Analysis), and Web Content Mining (including Sentiment
Analysis and Hate Speech Detection).
NOTE: It is highly recommended to attend the module “Web
Mining Project” in the same semester since the schedule and
topics of both modules are aligned.
Expertise:
Students will acquire knowledge of the techniques,
opportunities, and applications of Web mining.
(MK1, MF1)
Methodological competence:
Learning outcomes and
Successful participants will be able to identify opportunities
qualification goals
for mining knowledge from Web content, select and apply
appropriate techniques and interpret the results.
(MK2, MF3, MF4)
Personal competence: -
Media slide set, exercise sheets, data sets for the exercises
Literature • Bing Liu: Web Data Mining. 2nd Edition, Springer, 2011.
49• Wouter de Nooy, et al.: Exploratory Social Network
Analysis with Pajek. 2nd Edition, Cambridge University
Press, 2011.
• Bing Liu. Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining, Morgan
& Claypool Publishers, 2012.
The course consists of a lecture together with accompanying
practical exercises as well as student team projects. In the
Methods
exercises the participants will gather initial expertise in
applying state of the art web mining tools.
Form of assessment Written examination
Admission requirements
-
for assessment
Duration of assessment 60 minutes
Language English
Offering Spring semester
Lecturer Prof. Dr. Christian Bizer
Person in charge Prof. Dr. Christian Bizer
Duration of module 1 semester
Further modules -
M.Sc. Wirtschaftsinformatik, M.Sc. Mannheim Master in Data
Range of application
Science, Lehramt Informatik
Semester 1st/2nd/3rd semester
50