Structure and Concept of the Program
The "Mannheim Master in Management" (MMM) is a full-time study program designed for four
semesters. It has a unique curriculum, which allows an individual and flexible design of one’s study
plan.
The six areas of the Business School of the University of Mannheim
Accounting and Taxation
Finance, Banking and Insurance
Information Systems
Management
Marketing & Sales
Operations Management
offer together over 120 courses in Business Administration.
In three mandatory core courses in Core Competences and two core courses in Business Economics,
students acquire a profound scientific basis for the master's degree in Business Administration.
Beyond that, students can choose from a wide range of elective courses in Business Administration.
They can decide for themselves whether they want to specialize in one particular field of research or
if they want to combine courses from different areas. The decision can be adjusted every semester
anew, so that students can thus create their own individual academic profile.
The study concept is completed by an optional integration of an Elective (e.g. psychology, history,
business law or computer science). This enables students to develop an even more individual profile
beyond the boundaries of their own discipline.
According to the examination regulations, the MMM program thus comprises the following Subject
Areas:
Core Competences (16 ECTS credits, two mandatory (CC 501 and CC 504) and one mandatory
elective course (CC 502 or CC 503))
Business Economics (12 ECTS credits, two mandatory courses (BE 510 and BE 511))
Business Administration (44-68 ECTS credits, to be freely selected from over 120 elective courses
offered by the six areas of the Business School)
Elective (0-24 ECTS credits, one out of 13 electives can be chosen)
Master’s Thesis (24 ECTS credits)
Besides the high flexibility in the choice of courses, the "Mannheim Master in Management" is also
characterized by its international focus. Alongside the option of applying for a double degree pro-
5gram, MMM students have the opportunity to spend a semester abroad during their master’s stud-
ies. Outstanding students pursuing an academic career, can apply for the program option Business
Research. Taking courses from the doctoral programs of the Center for Doctoral Studies in Business
(CDSB) enables them to shorten the time to doctorate.
The “Mannheim Master in Management” covers the following superordinated program-specific
Competency Goals (CGs):
Profound subject-specific knowledge – Participants will distinguish and apply the theoretical and
conceptual foundations in pivotal business domains (CG 1).
Professional managerial skills – Participants will be proficient team players, analytical decision-
makers, and responsible, self-reliant professionals (CG 2).
Social responsibility – Participants will be critical, reflective, and ethical decision-makers (CG 3).
Enhanced scientific research capabilities – Participants will be highly skilled researchers and ana-
lysts (CG 4).
6