List of abbreviations
DE: Course is taught in German.
EN: Course is taught in English.
ECTS: ECTS (European Credit Transfer and Accumulation System) are credit points that specify the
number of working hours dedicated to one course over one semester. 1 ECTS equals 30 hours (1,800
minutes) of studying.
Form of assessment: The statet form of assessment applies to the regular examination dates (first
examination attempt).
FSS: Spring semester
HWS: Fall semester
Necessary prerequisites: You must fulfil the necessary prerequisites to be admitted to the exam
(this will be automatically checked when you register for the exam!). Please note that courses, that
are a necessary prerequisite for another course, have to be passed successfully upon the exam regis-
tration if not stated otherwise (“parallel attendance possible”).
Program-specific Competency Goals (CG): Competency Goals specify the competences students
will have obtained upon their graduation. You find the Competency Goals of the MMM program at
the beginning of the module catalog. The Competency Goals are regularly assessed in the Assur-
ance of Learning process.
Recommended prerequisites: Prerequisites you should fulfil to help you pass a course successfully.
They are simply a recommendation and are not being checked.
Study programs that include some MMM-modules (for details see "range of application" of
each module):
M.Sc. MMM: Master of Science: Mannheim Master in Management
M.Sc. Bus. Edu.: Master of Science: Business Education
M.Sc. Econ.: Master of Science: Economics
M.Sc. Bus. Inf.: Master of Science: Business Informatics
M.Sc. Bus. Math.: Mater of Science: Mathematics in Business and Economics
MAKUWI: Master of Arts: Culture and Economy
MMDS: Master of Science: Mannheim Master in Data Science
LL.M.: Master of Laws
7SWS (weekly working hours): Number of hours you need to dedicate to the course per week
("Semesterwochenstunden"). They are subdivided in “contact hours” (time you participate in lec-
tures) and “independent study time” (time you need to prepare for lectures and assessments). 1 SWS
equals 45 minutes.
8