Abbreviations
Explanation of abbreviations
This degree program provides students with a solid theoretical foundation as well as practi-
cal skills for data management, data analytics methods, responsible data science and data
science applications. The courses are divided in five groups - Data Science Fundamentals,
Data Management, Data Analytics Methods, Responsible Data Science, and Data Science Ap-
plications. After studying the fundamentals of Data Sciences, students will then learn how to
manage, analyse, and responsibly handle data. Furthermore, they will learn about the differ-
ent applications of data science in computer science, social sciences, or business and eco-
nomics. In addition to the regular lecture courses, students participate in a one or two se-
mester team project or individual project.
Knowledge
During their studies -
(MK1) all students develop a deep understanding of the relevant concepts, methods
and problem solving strategies used in different application domains.
(MK2) technology-oriented students learn the concepts, algorithms and strategies
used to solve concrete, practical application-oriented problems in informatics.
(MK3) social sciences-oriented students develop a deep understanding of how to set
up, analyse and interpret advanced empirical research questions.
As part of this education, students become familiar with a wide range of models, modelling
languages, methods, and tools. Regardless of their specialization, students also learn how to
collect, structure, manipulate, prepare, interpret, communicate, and use data, information
and knowledge.
140Capabilities
After completing their studies, students have the ability to –
(MF1) apply a wide range of abstraction and analysis techniques.
(MF2) understand, interpret, describe and present relevant scientific publications.
(MF3) exploit the latest scientific results.
(MF4) independently tackle problems in data management and analytics and de-
scribe their results in a structured, written form.
(MF5) continue their studies at the PhD level, if their results are of sufficient quality.
Competencies
After completing their studies, students have the competences needed to –
(MKO1) apply their knowledge and capabilities to solve specific problems in a team
context.
(MKO2) use their interdisciplinary education to mediate between technical and non-
technical individuals.
(MKO3) evaluate the latest changes in programming languages, systems, models and,
wherever possible, exploit them to develop better solutions to data-science
related problems.
141