2. Detailed descriptions
CS 560 Large-Scale Data Management
Form of module Lecture with exercises
Type of module Computer Science Fundamental
Level Master
ECTS 6
In presence: 56 h (4 SWS)
Workload
Exercises and self-study: 98 h
Very good knowledge of database systems, good knowledge of al-
Prerequisites
gorithms and data structures as well as Java programming
This course introduces the fundamental concepts and computa-
tional paradigms of large-scale data management and Big Data.
This includes methods for storing, updating, querying, and analyz-
ing large dataset as well as for data-intensive computing. The
course covers concept, algorithms, and system issues; accompa-
nying exercises provide hands-on experience. Topics include:
Aim of module
• Parallel and distributed databases
• Big Data Processing (including MapReduce, Spark)
• NoSQL databases
• Cloud databases
• Stream processing (tentative)
• Graph processing (tentative)
Expertise:
Students will acquire knowledge about methods and systems for
managing large datasets and data-intensive computing.
(MK1, MK2)
Learning outcomes and
Methodological competence:
qualification goals
• Be able to judge, select, and use traditional or non-traditional
data management systems for a given data management task
• Be able to solve computational problems involving large
datasets
(MF1)
6Personal competence:
• Study independently
• Presentation and writing skills
(MKO3)
Media Slide set, black board, exercise sheets, datasets, software
• T. Öszu, P. Valduriez
Principles of Distributed Database Systems
Springer, 4th ed., 2020
Literature • H. Garcia-Molina, J. D. Ullman, J. Widom
Database Systems: The Complete Book
Prentice Hall, 2nd ed., 2008
• More in lecture notes
Methods Lecture, weekly exercise, experimentation with different systems
Form of assessment Written examination
Duration of assessment 90 minutes
Language English
Offering Fall semester
Lecturer Prof. Dr. Rainer Gemulla
Person in charge Prof. Dr. Rainer Gemulla
Duration of module 1 semester
Further modules -
M.Sc. Wirtschaftsinformatik, M.Sc. Mannheim Master in Data Sci-
Range of application
ence, Lehramt Informatik
Semester 1st / 2nd semester
7IE 500 Data Mining
Form of module Lecture with exercises and project
Type of module Business Informatics Fundamental
Level Master
ECTS 6
Hours per semester: 56 h (4 SWS)
Workload Self-study per semester: 98 h
• 70 h: pre and post lecture studying and revision
• 28 h: examination preparation
Prerequisites Foundations of Statistics, Practical Informatics I
The course provides an introduction to advanced data analy-
sis techniques as a basis for analyzing business data and
providing input for decision support systems. The course will
cover the following topics:
• Goals and Principles of Data Mining
Aim of module • Data Representation and Preprocessing
• Classification
• Regression
• Cluster Analysis
• Association Analysis
• Practical Data Mining using Python
Expertise:
Students will acquire basic knowledge of the techniques, op-
portunities, and applications of data mining. (MK1, MF1)
Methodological competence:
• Successful participants will be able to identify opportuni-
ties for applying data mining in an enterprise environ-
Learning outcomes and
ment, select and apply appropriate techniques, and inter-
qualification goals
pret the results.
• project organization skills
(MK2, MF3, MF4, MKO1)
Personal competence:
• team work skills
• presentation skills
(MKO2, MF2)
8Slide set, exercise sheets, Jupyter notebooks, data sets for
Media
the exercises, lecture videos
• Pang-Ning Tan, Michael Steinback, Vipin Kumar: Introduc-
tion to Data Mining, 2nd Edition, Pearson.
Literature
• Aurélien Géron: Hands-on Machine Learning with Scikit-
Learn, Keras & TensorFlow, 3rd Edition, O’Reilly.
The course consists of a lecture together with accompanying
practical exercises as well as student team projects. In the ex-
ercises the participants will gather initial expertise in applying
state of the art data mining tools on realistic data sets. The
Methods group projects take place in the last third of the term. Within
the projects, students implement advanced data mining pro-
jects of personal choice and report about the results of their
projects in the form of a written report as well as an oral
presentation.
Written examination (75%), project report (20%), oral project
Form of assessment
presentation (5%)
Admission requirements
-
for assessment
60 minutes (written examination), 5-11 pages (project re-
Duration of assessment
port), 5-15 minutes (oral project presentation)
Language English
Offering Fall semester / Spring semester
Lecturer Prof. Dr. Heiko Paulheim; Prof. Dr. Christian Bizer
Person in charge Prof. Dr. Heiko Paulheim; Prof. Dr. Christian Bizer
Duration of module 1 Semester
IE 675b – Machine Learning, IE 678 – Deep Learning,
Further modules IS 661 – Text Analytics, CS 646 – Higher Level Computer Vi-
sion, IE 671 – Web Mining
M.Sc. Wirtschaftsinformatik, M.Sc. Mannheim Master in Data
Range of application
Science, Lehramt Informatik
Semester 1st/2nd semester
9IE 675b Machine Learning
Form of module Lecture with exercises
Type of module Specialization Course
Level Master
ECTS 9
In presence: 56 h (4 SWS)
Workload
Exercises, assignments, and self-study: 174 h
IE 500 Data Mining I (recommended), knowledge of probability
Prerequisites
and statistics, no attempted or completed IE 675 exam
Machine learning is concerned with building computer systems
that improve with experience as well as the study of learning pro-
cesses, including the design of algorithms that are able to make
predictions or extract knowledge from data. The aim of this mod-
ule is to provide an introduction into the field of machine learn-
ing, and study algorithms, underlying concepts, and theoretical
principles. Topics include:
Aim of module
• Basics of machine learning
• Inference and decision
• Selected classification and regression models
• Dimensionality reduction
• Mixture models and EM
• Kernels and vector machines
• Hyperparameter optimization
Expertise:
Deep understanding of algorithms and underlying concepts of ma-
chine learning
(MK1, MF1)
Methodological competence:
• Being able to apply machine learning techniques and systems
Learning outcomes and
for a given problem
qualification goals
• Being able to model and implement new machine learning
techniques
(MK2, MF3, MF4)
Personal competence:
• writing skills
• presentation skills
10• statistical programming skills
(MKO3, MF2)
Media Slide set, exercise sheets, software, datasets
• K.P. Murphy. Probabilistic Machine Learning: An Introduction.
The MIT Press, 2022
Literature • I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, A. Courville. Deep Learning, The MIT
Press, 2017
• Additional material and articles provided in lecture notes
The course consists of a lecture accompanied by theoretical and
practical exercises as well as case studies with real data. In the ex-
Methods
ercises, students will deepen the material discussed in the lecture,
apply the methods in practice, and present the result.
Form of assessment Written examination
Admission requirements
Homework assignments (pass at least 3 assignments)
for assessment
Duration of assessment 90 minutes
Language English
Offering Fall semester
Lecturer Prof. Dr. Rainer Gemulla
Person in charge Prof. Dr. Rainer Gemulla
Duration of module 1 Semester
Further modules -
M.Sc. Wirtschaftsinformatik, M.Sc. Mannheim Master in Data Sci-
Range of application
ence
Semester 1st/2nd/3rd semester
11CS 652 Data Security and Privacy
Form of module Inverted classroom with exercises
Type of module Specialization course
Level Master
ECTS 6
Hours per semester present: 56h (4 SWS)
Workload
Self-study: 112h
There are no formal prerequisites but knowledge in cryptography
Prerequisites or IT-security is recommended, e.g., by attending the lectures
“Kryptographie I” or “Selected Topics in IT-Security”
Nowadays, users are more and more revealing data to the out-
side – either willingly as in the context of data mining or possibly
unconsciously as in the case of the Internet of Things. The aim of
the module is to raise awareness, in particular with respect to pri-
vacy violations. This is done by showing various security threats,
Aim of module e.g., traces left in the Internet such as the use of cookies or
browser fingerprinting. In particular, the topic of privacy preser-
vation will be covered. This includes discussing different ap-
proaches for defining the meaning of privacy but also possible
countermeasures such as anonymization of data or the use of
dedicated encryption schemes.
Expertise:
Students will acquire the knowledge to identify security and pri-
vacy threats and to select and use appropriate countermeasures.
(MK2)
Methodological competence:
Learning outcomes and
Successful participants will be able to understand, to select, apply
qualification goals
and evaluate the most appropriate techniques for a variety of dif-
ferent privacy-sensitive scenarios. In particular they are able to
realize possible risks in new scenarios and to transfer given solu-
tions to these.
(MK1)
12Personal competence:
The analytic, concentrated, and precise thinking of the students is
trained. By the independent treatment of applications, e.g. in the
course of the exercises, their abstraction capacity is further devel-
oped and the transfer of the learned material to related ques-
tions is trained.
(MF1, MKO3)
Media Video recordings, annotated lecture slides
Literature Will be announced in the lecture
Reworking the lecture and studying the relevant literature in self-
study. During the lecture: discussing questions and ideas and
Methods
working together on concrete examples. Solving exercises in self-
study and in practice in cooperation with fellow students.
Form of assessment Written exam
Admission requirements
-
for assessment
Duration of assessment 90 minutes
Language English
Spring semester (in FSS24 this course will only be offered as
Offering
online-course in form of videos)
Lecturer Prof. Dr. Frederik Armknecht
Person in charge Prof. Dr. Frederik Armknecht
Duration of module 1 semester
Further modules -
M.Sc. Mannheim Master in Data Science,
Range of application M.Sc. Wirtschaftsinformatik, Lehramt Informatik,
M.Sc. Mathematik
Semester 1st/2nd/3rd semester
13